DEPARTMENT OF ENGLISH
SCHOOL OF HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
SHIV NADAR INSTITUTION OF EMINENCE
B.A. (RESEARCH) ENGLISH
PROSPECTUS FOR 2024 ADMISSIONS
Contents
B.A. (Research) in English 1
Program Requirements 2
Undergraduate Minor in English 2
Course-list with 4-Year Pathway 4
Skills Imparted 5
Outcomes and Possible Careers 5
Course descriptions 6
Department Faculty and Their Areas of Specialization 20
B.A. (Research) in English
The B.A. (Research) in English syllabus at Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence seeks to absorb
and deploy the pedagogical possibilities that have become part of our continuously evolving
discipline as it moves through the twenty-first century. While never compromising on the rigor
and knowledge base offered by a modern English program in the best universities, our new
syllabus makes some major innovations.
First, it draws on the methodological breakthroughs emerging from philosophy, anthropology,
semiotics, and the exciting new knowledge systems of the cyber world, to constitute itself as
an inherently interdisciplinary program. Second, we have the resources and are committed to
training students, in workshop-like conditions, in both academic and creative writing. Third,
the program draws on the exponential expansion of translation to decenter the ‘English’ in
English literature and to treat the language as a means of mediating between literatures
originating in various parts of the world. Finally, our B.A. program has a strong research
component. All senior students are required to write an 8,000-word research paper, carrying
the weight of 12 credits and based on a specific set of readings and weekly consultations with
a designated supervisor.
At the heart of our new English program is the commitment to reconstitute traditional literary
categories in contemporary ways. We take the student through several pathways that include:
fictional traditions stretching from the novel to graphic novels and videogames, the literatures
of South Asia, literary and cultural theory, world poetry, and the development of theatre from
classical to contemporary. Moreover, the English program at SNIoE sees no contradiction
between creative and expository writing. Every student is required to do a compulsory course
on academic writing but we also have creative writers among us who offer optional creative
writing courses with a focus on prose fiction.
The English department at Shiv Nadar IoE is designed to give students the intellectual training,
knowledge base, and communication skills necessary for a range of professions: the civil
services, publishing, journalism, advertising, content writing, and law. Most of all, we look out
for undergraduate students with outstanding academic potential to groom for our graduate
program which is among the finest in the country.
1
Program Requirements
Shiv Nadar IoE guidelines require undergraduate students to complete 150 credits of
coursework over a minimum of 3 years to graduate with a B.A. Research degree. To qualify
as an English Major, the student must earn 108 credits from English courses and the
remaining 42 from the CCC and the UWE categories.
150 = 108 + 42
Total credits English Department credits CCC + UWE credits
The English Major consists of twenty-four 4-credit courses and one 12-credit Supervised
Research Paper (UGSRP) to be completed in four years. As can be seen from the course listing
provided below, the first two years aim at providing the student a historical grounding in the
discipline. The student is familiarized with the most significant genres within literature and
with great movements such as the humanism of the Renaissance, and modernism, that
transformed the literary domain. The third and fourth years offer courses pitched at a more
advanced level. This is the time for the student to get acquainted with particular lines of
specialization. The individually supervised essay, written through the seventh and eighth
semesters, trains the student to engage with rigor and depth in a focused area of research.
Undergraduate Minor in English
Students of the university from disciplines other than English may earn a Minor in English by
successfully completing at least 6 courses (i.e., 24 credits) from the English Department as
University Wide Electives (UWE). Of these six courses, at least two must be "Core"
English department courses. The “Core” English department courses are listed below:
ENG104 Academic Writing
ENG143 Drama: Tropes and Adaptations
ENG240 Getting Verse
ENG241 Shakespeare and his Contemporaries
ENG245 South Asian Literature
ENG343 Landmarks in the Novel Form
Eligibility for getting registered as an English Minor:
 For SHSS students: the student must have completed at least one ENG course apart
from ENG104.
 For non-SHSS students: the student must have completed at least one ENG course.
2
Some guidelines for English Minors:
1. Students may register for the Minor when the application form is sent out by the
Academic Dean's office (typically at the beginning of the students’ 3rd semester).
Even if they do not officially register for the minor but manage to meet the eligibility
requirements by the end of the 8th semester, students may write to the department’s
UG Advisor during the 8th semester and get registered at that time. However, if the
student is sure about pursuing the minor right from the beginning, it is a good idea to
get officially registered as early as possible so that they are given preference in course
enrollments.
2. We recommend that English Minors try to take 100 or 200 level courses early on, and
300 and 400 level courses in the later semesters. But this is not a strict rule. Our
courses do not have prerequisites (except in the case of ENG444, whose prerequisite
is ENG340), so students may do the courses in any order they please. In case the
student finds their timetable clashing with 100 and 200 level courses, or that seats
are no longer available for those courses, the student may opt for higher level courses.
3
B.A. English (Research): 4-Year Pathway
Year Monsoon Semester Spring Semester
Year 1 ECO108 Logic and the Scientific Method (C) SOC102 Understanding Modernity (C)
ENG104 Academic Writing (C) ENG142 Fantasy and Science Fiction
ENG141 The Language Game of Literature ENG143 Drama: Tropes and Adaptations (C)
ENG144 Keywords for Literary and Cultural Studies
CCC
CCC UWE
Year 2 ENG241 Shakespeare and his Contemporaries (C) ENG240 Getting Verse (C)
ENG242 Linguistic Approaches to Literature ENG243 Introduction to Translation Studies
ENG245 South Asian Literature (C) ENG244 Modernist Literature
CCC CCC
UWE UWE
Year 3 ENG340 The Fundamentals of Creative Writing ENG343 Landmarks in the Novel Form (C)
ENG341 Mapping Language Change ENG346 Introduction to Postcoloniality
ENG342 Introduction to Critical Theory ENG347 Popular Fiction
ENG348 Literature and the Non-human
CCC CCC
UWE UWE
Year 4 ENG440 Contemporary Forms of Fiction ENG444 Crafting Short Fiction
ENG441 Feminist Theory: Unlocking the Literary (Alt) ENG445 World Folk Literature
ENG446 Vernacular Literary Practices ENG447 Literary Culture of the Enlightenment
ENG448 Anthropocene Fictions (Alt) and Romanticism
ENG499 UG Supervised Research Paper ENG499 UG Supervised Research Paper
Important:
1. English Majors must complete at least 108 credits from the English department.
2. Courses marked in bold are compulsory for all SHSS students, including English
Majors.
3. Courses marked “(C)” are “Core” courses.
4. Courses marked “(Alt)” are offered on alternate academic years.
5. "Logic and the Scientific Method" and "Understanding Modernity" are not English
department courses, but they are considered Core for English Majors.
6. The courses shown above are all 4-credit courses, with the exception of the “UG
Supervised Research Paper” (UGSRP), which is worth 12 credits. The UGSRP is spread
over the 7th and 8th semesters and is compulsory for all English Majors.
4
Skills Imparted
Graduating students acquire a wide range of generic as well as subject-specific skills. A
typical SNIoE B.A. English (Research) graduate will be able to:
 Analyse and interpret multiple genres of literature and storytelling, including in
prose, poetry, drama, film, TV shows, and graphic novels.
 Have a sound grasp of the literary history and literary forms that have flourished in
different parts of the world from the early 16th century to present times.
 Analyse highly complex texts and write long, extensively researched papers.
 Present research lucidly, with cogent arguments and in attractive language.
 Correct chunks of prose. Make sentences more forceful or better organised; correct
spelling, grammatical, and punctuation mistakes. This is an indispensable skill in the
editorial side of both book publishing and print journalism.
 Easily negotiate competitive examinations, many of which have an essay paper as
well as a paper on Literature.
Outcomes and Possible Careers
Our students have taken up a wide range of careers including in academics, editing and
publishing, media and communication, business administration, law, instructional design,
teaching, art curation, public health, event management, and others.
Academic careers: our students have gone on to pursue M.A. and even direct-Ph.D. degrees
in areas as diverse as literary studies, policy studies, media and communication, and
business administration (MBA).
Corporate sector careers: several SNIoE English graduates are currently placed in top
multinational companies. While some have gained these placements immediately after their
B.A. (Research) in English degrees, others have done so after combining their BA with a
Master’s degree.
Teaching careers: some of our graduates have taken up school teaching after having
completed teaching-related internships during their undergraduate program.
SNIoE has an active Career Development Cell (CDC) that engages with students on a weekly
basis in their 3rd year. The CDC helps students acquire internships, train for interviews, and
gain placement in their graduation year.
5
Course Descriptions
ENG141 The Language Game of Literature
This course seeks to address some basic questions that pertain to the domain of the literary.
Some of these are: what kinds of texts qualify as literature? Do literary texts possess some
special, objectively demonstrable properties, or does the label merely connote some
arbitrary social consensus? Moreover, do literary texts invite us to treat them differently, as
compared to non-literary texts? Does the appreciation of a literary text, depending on
whether it is a poem, a story, or a play, require us to pay attention to different kinds of
textual phenomena? What precisely are those phenomena? The kinds of questions raised
above will be addressed in this course as we immerse ourselves in a wide-ranging selection
of texts drawn from the genres of poetry, fiction, and drama. The texts are chosen so that
our engagement with each of them will illuminate some specific aspects of literary
appreciation. Also, as we progress through this course, we will build a critical vocabulary
that will enable us to express, with increasing clarity, our assessments of the literary merits
of literary texts. (3:1:0). Prerequisites: none.
Primary Texts
Poetry: a selection of poems ranging across history and geography. The poems for study will
be made available to the student either electronically or through handouts.
Drama: Henrik Ibsen, A Doll’s House (1879).
Fiction: A selection of short stories including:
“The Fall of the House of Usher,” Edgar Allen Poe (1839).
“The Yellow Wallpaper,” Charlotte Perkins Gilman (1892).
“The Garden of Forking Paths” Jorge Luis Borges (1941). Trans. Andrew Hurley.
“The Paper Menagerie,” Ken Liu (2011).
ENG142 Fantasy and Science Fiction
During the course we will discuss the nature of Science Fiction (SF) literature as a form of
fiction writing, how it is different from other forms of writing, and what it can do that other
forms of writing cannot (especially critique prevailing socio-political norms, gender relations,
etc.) (3:1:0). Prerequisites: none.
Primary Texts
Akbar, Prayaag. Leila.
Asimov, Isaac. I, Robot. (Selections)
Annihilation (dir. Alex Garland)
Arrival (dir. Denis Villeneuve)
Dozois, Gardner, ed. Modern Classics of Science Fiction. (Selections)
Gibson, William. Neuromancer.
Le Guin, Ursula K. “The Author of the Acacia Seeds and Other Extracts from the Journal of
Therolinguistics.”
Sakhawat Hossain, Rokeya. “Sultana’s Dream.”
Shelley, Mary. Frankenstein.
ENG143 Drama: Tropes and Adaptations
This course focuses on theories, tropes and adaptations of tragedy from ancient Greece to
the 21st century. We shall probe ideas of sacrifice, citizenship, transgression and punishment
through assigned readings, approaching drama as both literary text and culturally embedded
6
performance. Particular attention will be paid to the traffic of ideas and concepts between
philosophy, literature and politics. (3:1:0). Prerequisites: None.
Primary Texts
Euripides, Medea
Medea dir. Pier Paolo Pasolini
Sophocles, The Theban Plays
Kamila Shamsie, Home Fire
Seneca, Phaedra
Jean Racine, Phèdre
Sarah Kane, Phaedra’s Love
Aristotle, Poetics (selections)
Ruth Scodel, An Introduction to Greek Tragedy (selections)
Edith Hall, Inventing the Barbarian: Greek Self-Definition through Tragedy (selections)
Judith Butler, Antigone’s Claim (selections)
Rene Girard, Violence and the Sacred (selections)
Giorgio Agamben, Homo Sacer (selections)
ENG144 Keywords for Literary and Cultural Studies
Popularised through Raymond Williams’ Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society
(1976), keywords or key terms and concepts are rightly understood as the fundamental
building blocks for the study of any academic discipline. The proposed course will introduce
the students who would be beginning their foray into literary and cultural studies to
fundamental terms and concepts like “the literary”, “context”, “culture”, and
“representation” over the course of fifteen weeks in the first semester. The course has been
structured in such a way that a literary or cultural work like a short novel, play, poem,
documentary, graphic narrative, or story is to be read alongside a brief piece of critical
writing. The literary or cultural work and the critical piece do not quite address the same
contexts but reflect on the same keyword. Consequently, they will provide the students with
a holistic understanding of the particular keyword under consideration during a week
without overpowering or overshadowing each other. (3:1:0). Prerequisites: None.
Bibliography:
Alison Bechdel, Fun Home: A Family Tragicomic, Jonathan Cape, 2006.
Aravind Malagatti, Karya, trans. Susheela Punitha, Hamish Hamilton, 2021.
(Selections from) Arundhathi Subramaniam ed., Wild Women: Seekers, Protagonists, and
Goddesses in Sacred Indian Poetry, Ebury/Penguin, 2024.
Catherine Lacey, Pew, Granta Publications, 2020.
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, “A Private Experience” from The Thing Around Your Neck,
Fourth Estate, 2009, pp. 43-56.
Chinua Achebe, Things Fall Apart, Heinemann, African Writers Series, 1958.
David Malouf, Child’s Play, Vintage International, 1999.
Derek Walcott, “O Serbian sibyl, prophetess”, from The Prodigal, Poetry, September 2004, p.
364.
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poetrymagazine/browse?volume=184&issue=5
&page=28>
Frederic Jameson, “A Note on Literary Realism” in Matthew Beaumont ed. Adventures in
Realism, Blackwell Publishing, 2007, pp. 261-271.
Geetanjali Shree, The Roof Beneath Their Feet, trans. Rahul Soni. Penguin, 2023.
7
Harold Bloom, “Elegy for the Canon” from The Western Canon: The Books and Schools of the
Ages, Harcourt Brace, 1994, pp. 1-17. <https://eng2713blog.wordpress.com/wp-
content/uploads/2017/08/elegy-for-the-canon-by-harold-bloom.pdf >
Irfan Habib, “Nationalism in India: Past and Present”, Social Scientist, Vol. 45, No. 3/4, 2017,
pp. 3-8.
J. M. Coetzee, “What is a Classic?”, Current Writing: Text and Reception in Southern Africa,
Vol. 5, Issue 2, 1993, pp. 7 to 24.
(Selections from) James Wood, How Fiction Works, Vintage, 2009.
Jessica Hurley, “Focalisation (Point of View)”, from “The Problem of Fictional Character”, The
University of Chicago. <https://voices.uchicago.edu/201801engl25640/focalization-
point-of-view/ >
Kartiki Gonsalves dir. The Elephant Whisperers, Sikhya Entertainment, Netflix, India/US,
2022.
Katherine Mansfield, “Bliss” from Bliss and Other Stories, Penguin Books, 1920, pp. 8-15.
Raymond Williams, “Dominant, Residual, and Emergent” from Marxism and Literature,
Oxford University Press, 1977, pp. 121-127.
Teju Cole, “Lecture 1: Experience”, Berlin Family Lectures, 8th April 2019, The University of
Chicago. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RSlD1CLUTZM&t=12s>
Terry Eagleton, “Introduction: What is Literature?” from Literary Theory: An Introduction,
University of Minnesota Press, 2008, pp. 1-15.
Uma Chakravarti, “In Her Own Write: Writing from a Dalit Feminist Standpoint”, India
International Centre Quarterly, Vol. 39, No. 3-4, 2012-13, pp. 134-145.
Virginia Woolf, “Mr. Bennett and Mrs. Brown”, The Hogarth Press, 1924, pp. 11-25.
William Wordsworth, “The Solitary Reaper”.
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/45554/the-solitary-reaper>
ENG240 Getting Verse
This course will introduce students to the idea of poetic form, think about what constitutes a
poetic movement, and focus on individual poets as training in ways to read poetry by
understanding craft and cultivating an ear for resonance to understand what individual
talent has to do with tradition. We will sample genres and modes and learn about what the
distinguishing and overlapping characteristics of different poetic forms and modes in the
following, for instance: sonnet, ghazal, blank verse, ode and dramatic monologue. Moving
from reading poems in isolation we will think about the idea of poetic tradition, where a
group of poets can be read together as part of a movement. (3:1:0). Prerequisites: none.
Primary Texts
A selection of poems by:
Geoffrey Chaucer
William Shakespeare
John Donne
Christina Rossetti
Philip Larkin
Phillis Wheatley
Langston Hughes
Adrienne Rich
Sylvia Plath
Joy Harjo
Nissim Ezekiel
Kamala Das
8
Arun Kolatkar
Agha Shahid Ali
Hoshang Merchant
ENG241 Shakespeare and His Contemporaries.
This course seeks to introduce students to some landmark plays in the Elizabeth period:
probably the greatest phase in England’s literary history. We will study one play by
Christopher Marlow and two by Shakespeare. Apart from introducing students to the two
most significant sub genres within the Elizabethan corpus - tragedy and comedy – the
course will also help students grasp some of the central categories used in critical
discussions on 16th and 17th century drama. Thus we will focus categories like Renaissance
Humanism and on character types such as the tragic hero, the Machiavellian villain and the
fool. Finally, we will explore, through these plays, the many reasons that have led scholars
to argue that the Renaissance in Europe laid the foundations of the modern world. (3:1:0).
Prerequisites: None.
Primary Texts
Dr. Faustus
Othello
A Midsummer’s Night’s Dream
ENG242 Linguistic Approaches to literature
This course will be on the basic concepts in Linguistics: Phonetics, Morphology, Semantics,
Syntax, includes theory plus practice sessions – to familiarize students to the methodology
of modern linguistics and analytic reasoning via examination of linguistic data. The course
would be divided into four modules. The course also introduces students to philological
analysis of literary texts. Students are also introduced to selected essays by the philologist
Eric Auerbach and Sheldon Pollock. (3:1:0) Prerequisites: None.
Module 1: Old English - Historically seen; Structure of Words Morphology; Studying Beowulf
on its language, context, and cultural background to become familiar with old
English; Studying a tale from the Canterbury Tales (preferably The Knight's Tale),
rudiments of Middle English as a spoken and written language, to become familiar
with Middle English.
Module 2: Beyond the Sounds - Phonetics -Introduction – Phonemic changes; Beyond the
sentence: Pragmatics; Translation exercises; Transliteration from Old/ Middle
English into Modern English
Module 3: Beyond the Meaning: Semantics; Beyond the Sentence Structure: Syntax;
Module 4: Theory - Auerbach's Philology and Readings of Sheldon Pollock.
Primary Texts
Beowulf ( 1st 300 verses) Manuscript available through the Electronic Beowulf Project
Canterbury Tales (The Knight's Tale), Simon, Sherry; Gender in Translation — Cultural
Identity and the Politics of Transmission. 1996. New York: Routledge.
Fromkin, Victoria, Robert Rodman, & Nina Hyams. An Introduction to Language, 10th
edition. Cengage Learning, 2014.
Steven Pinker 2007, ‘The Language Instinct: How the Mind Creates Language’, HarperCollins
Publishers Inc.
Eric Auerbach’s essay “Philology and WeltLiteratur” and selections from Mimesis.
Selected Essays by Sheldon Pollock.
9
ENG243 Introduction to Translation Studies
This is a basic course introduces students to key theories, models and approaches in
Translation Studies relevant to contemporary research and practice in the field. The
students would be studying statements from linguists, theologians, and writers to examine
and recognize the value of the diversity with which translation has been appreciated and
practiced throughout the ages. They will be able to understand Translation Theories, analyze
the traditional understanding of the link between the original and translated text, between
author and translator, the source and target languages and cultures. (3:1:0). Prerequisites:
none.
The course is divided into three modules:
1. History of Translation and Translation Studies
(From ancient times to the 20th century)
Linguistic approach; Machine Translation; Translation: process and product;
Techniques, strategies, and procedures in translation
2. A Survey of Different Approaches in Translation Studies:
Translation Theories and Applicability: Benjamin Steiner; Hans Josef Vermeer; Even-
Zohar; Gayatri Spivak; Susan Bassnett; Simon, Sherry; Niranjana Tejaswini
3. Translation Project
Translation of a text (max. 4000 words) from ‘source’ language into ‘target’ language
and the involved process of translating the text.
Primary Texts
Munday Jeremy; 2008; Introducing Translation Studies: Theories and Applications; Taylor &
Francis; ISBN: 0415396948, 9780415396943
Susan Bassnett, ed. Translating Literature
John Biguenet and Rainer Schulte, eds., The Craft of Translation
The Letters of St. Jerome; Letter 57 -- To Pammachius On The Best Method Of Translating;
English Translation: Fremantle, pp. 112-119
Vermeer Hans J.;1996; “Skopos and Commission in Translational Action
George Steiner: The Translation Studies Reader. 2000. (Ed) Lawrence Venuti. Routledge
Itamar Even-Zohar: "The Position of Translated Literature within the Literary Polysystem."
Poetics Today 11:1 (1990), pp. 45-51.
Simon, Sherry; Gender in Trans-lation — Cultural Identity and the Politics of Transmission.
1996. New York: Routledge
Tejaswini Niranjana; Siting Translation: History, Post-Structuralism and the Colonial Context
Spivak Gayatri Chakravorty; ‘The Politics of Translation’. In The Translation Studies Reader.
2000. (Ed) Lawrence Venuti. Routledge.
ENG244 Modernist Literature
This course will familiarize the student with the literary-aesthetic paradigm that has come to
be called “modernist.” This will be achieved through the study of exemplary works in each of
the major genres: the novel, the short story, drama, and poetry. Through this study the
student will gain a sound understanding not only of the particulars of the modernist
aesthetic, but also of the cultural, political, and philosophical ethos that informed it. (3:1:0).
Prerequisites: none.
Primary Texts
Fiction
James Joyce, “The Dead” (1914).
Virginia Woolf, Mrs Dalloway (1925).
Drama:
10
Eugene Ionesco, Rhinoceros (1949).
Poetry: A selection of poems by poets such as William Butler Yeats, Wilfred Owen, H.D.,
William Carlos Williams, Marianne Moore, Wallace Stevens, Rainer Maria Rilke, and
T S Eliot.
ENG245 South Asian Literature
This course is designed to introduce students to some vibrant texts in contemporary South
Asian literature. It straddles the genres of novel, poetry and short stories written in different
regions of South Asia, including Sri Lanka, India and Pakistan. This course seeks, thus, to
familiarize the students with the literary output in South Asia and its diasporas, that comes
to grips with vital questions of form, class, caste, language, religion and gender. (3:1:0).
Prerequisites: none.
Primary Texts
Rabindranath Tagore, The Home and The World (Ghare Baire), 1916.
Premchand, “Kafan”, translated by Frances W. Pritchett, 1936.
Mallika Shaikh, excerpts, I want to destroy myself, 1984. Memoir.
Paromita Vohra, Where’s Sandra? - documentary film. 2015.
Vivek Shanbag, Ghachar Ghochar, 2013. Novella.
Rashid Jahan and Manto, Selected fiction.
Daniyal Mueenuddin, “In Other Rooms, Other Wonders”, In Other Rooms, Other Wonders.
Delhi: Penguin, 2009.
ENG340 The Fundamentals of Creative Writing
Important: This course should be limited to no more than 15 students
Introduction to Creative Writing uses a mixture of classroom lecture, in-class writing,
workshopping and production of work to familiarise the students with the basics of poetry
and prose writing. In the first half of the semester, we will focus on exercises geared
towards writing with the senses, which is essential to the production of poetry. Students
will also be familiarised with the basics of using the meter and free verse. In the second half
of the semester, we will concentrate on prose. We will discuss issues such as using
autobiography to create fiction, choosing the right point of view from which to tell the story,
creating a memorable character and coming up with a beguiling plot. Students will also learn
to utilise workshopping techniques, which will enable them to become better critics of their
own and other people’s work.
The emphasis will be on writing as a reader, and reading as a writer. It is impossible to be a
good writer without being a good reader of your own and other people’s work. We will look
at a number of poems and stories by accomplished writers and identify various techniques
that students can utilise in their own work. By the end of the course, students should be
well-versed in the basics of writing poetry and prose fiction. Overall, these should help
strengthen their critical thinking skills, as well as allow them to think outside the box. Along
with that, there should also be a general improvement in writing skills.
The method of instruction will be a combination of the seminar and the workshop. At
various points of the semester, we will be in seminar mode where we will discuss the work
of well-known writers as well as the various nuts and bolts of poetry and prose writing. At
other times, we will shift to workshop mode where the emphasis will be on workshopping
student work. Although we will not be using computers in class, the internet will be useful
in terms of research as well as reading outside class. Hence, access to it is a must. (3:1:0).
Prerequisites: none.
11
Primary Texts
Maya Angelou, ‘I know why the caged bird sings,’ (Poem)
William Butler Yeats, ‘The Lake Isle of Innisfree’ (Poem)
Ezra Pound ‘In the station at the metro’ (Poem),
Esther Morgan, ‘Avocados’ (Poem)
Tim O’Brien, ‘The Man I Killed’ (short story),
Junot Diaz, ‘How to date a brown girl (black girl, white girl, or halfie) (short story),
Salman Rushdie, ‘Good advice is rarer than rubies’ (short story)
Raymond Carver, ‘Popular Mechanics (short story).
ENG341 Mapping Language Change
Language change is constant. Linguistic boundaries are never clear-cut. At best, linguistic
boundaries can be described as overlapping transitional spaces where migration and
urbanization shape new possibilities of human interaction. Language spoken at present is
the best laboratory for a linguist.
This course is both theoretical and empirical inquiry into language change. Focus of the
chosen texts is on language universals and linguistic typology. Second part of this course will
be field study- data collection and analysis. Students will learn data analysis through
triangulation- statistical analysis of quantitative data in specialized linguistic labs; and critical
discourse analysis of qualitative data. (1:0:3). Prerequisites: none.
Primary Texts
Language Universals and Linguistic Typology, Bernard Comrie, 1981.
Weinreich,U., Labov, W., Herzog, M., 1968. Empirical Foundations for a Theory of Language
Change, in Directions for Historical Linguistics, ed. W.P.Lehmann, Y. Malkiel, 97-195,
Austin: Univ. Texas Press.
M. Nowakowaski. Generative Grammar and Theories of Language Change (Methodological
and Historical aspects)
Raymond Hickey. Language Change
Robert L. Rankin. Methods for Studying Language Change
ENG342 Introduction to Critical Theory
This course aims to introduce students to the basic theoretical works that revolutionized the
humanities generally and literary studies specifically in the 20th and 21st centuries. The focus
of the texts chosen is insistently on cultural production and critical theory, texts and
contexts. The course will ask questions like what are the deeper structures that inform texts,
cultural production, and even everyday life? How can we think critically about texts, the
culture they are a part of, and the society that produces them? The reading list comprise
some of the most definitive works we have on (a) the basic aspects of the literary (language,
discourse, author, reader), (b) literary genres (the novel, poetry) and the locations of literary
criticism (Feminism, Post-colonialism); along with cutting edge research emerging from
across humanistic disciplines focusing on literary and cultural production.
Focusing on language, discourse, genres and social orientation, this course will equip
students with sophisticated conceptual frames to deal with not just literary material but any
situation in life which involves human communication. (3:1:0). Prerequisites: none.
Primary Texts
A Course in General Linguistics (1915), Ferdinand de Saussure ed. M. Baskin (London:
Fontana) p65-78
12
Excerpts from Mythologies (1972 [1957]), Roland Barthes. Trans. Jonathan Cape. New York:
Noonday Press
‘The Ego and the Id’ (1923), from The Ego and the Id (1989[1960,1923]), Sigmund Freud.
Trans. Joan Riviere. Rev and ed. James Strachey. (London and New York: W.W.
Norton & Co.) (pp. 3-36)
‘Hegemony, Intellectuals and the State’, Cultural theory and Popular Culture: A Reader, ed.
John Storey.
‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction’ (1936), Walter Benjamin
‘Encoding/Decoding’, Stuart Hall, in The Cultural Studies Reader, ed. Simon During.
‘Introduction’ from Distinction: A Social Critique of the Judgement of Taste (1996, 1984
[1979]), Pierre Bourdieu. Trans. Richard Nice. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
pp. 1-8
Roland Barthes, “Death of the Author” From Image-Music-Text (1968) trans. S.Heath, pp142-
48
“What is an Author”, from Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology: Essential works of
Foucault 1954-1984 (1998 [1994]), Ed. James D Faubion, trans. Robert Hurley and
others, pp. 205-222.
‘The Laugh of the Medusa’, Hélène Cixous. Trans. Keith Cohen and Paula Cohen. Signs Vol. 1,
no. 4. (1976), pp. 875-893.
‘Demarginalizing the intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of
Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory, and Antiracist Politics’, Kimberle
Crenshaw. The University of Chicago Legal Forum (1989)
‘Preface (1999)’ Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (1999 [1990]),
Judith Butler. New York and London: Routledge. pp. vii-xxvi.
‘Introduction: Points of Departure’, in Peter Childs and Patrick Williams (eds.), An
Introduction to Post-Colonial Theory, pp.1-25.
‘The Fact of Blackness’, Black Skins, White Masks (2008 [1967, 1952]), Frantz Fanon. Trans.
Charles Lamm Markmann
‘The Cultural Politics of the Dalit Movement: Notes and Reflections’, The Flaming Feet and
Other Essay (2010). (Ranikhet: Permanent Black) pp. (93-109)
ENG343 Landmarks in the Novel Form
This course is designed to introduce students to some of the most characteristic forms that
the novel has taken through the course of its long and continuing evolution and to the range
of expressive possibilities that the novel, as a whole, has acquired.
The novels that will be studied in this course are (i) Don Quijote (Part 1), one of the earliest
novels and one that takes as its central question: what does it mean to read and write
novels? (ii) Wuthering Heights, seemingly a ‘domestic novel’ that does what no domestic
novel did in the nineteenth century (iii) Disgrace, which raises some of the most pressing
questions about the ethics and aesthetics of telling ‘a good story’.(3:1:0). Prerequisites:
none.
Primary Texts
Miguel De Cervantes, Don Quijote Book 1 (1605) trans. Burton Raffel
Emily Bronte, Wuthering Heights (1847)
J.M. Coetzee, Disgrace (1999)
13
ENG346 Introduction to Postcoloniality
This course shall introduce postcolonial theory and literature from Africa, the Middle East,
Africa, Latin America, Carribbean, and South Asia. The course will engage the students with
questions and debates around the term “postcolonial”, its varied and often contested
meanings, its progression as an academic discipline especially in the context of globalisation
and cultural imperialism. The texts chosen cover a wide range of theorists and writers,
introducing students to key terms in postcolonial theory like postcoloniality, Orientalism,
Negritude, Hybridity, the Subaltern, Postcolonial Feminism, and Queerness in postcolonial
contexts.
Primary Texts
Hodge and Mishra, ‘What is Post-Colonialism?’ in Colonial Discourse and Postcolonial
Theory: A Reader (1994) , eds. Williams and Chrisman, pp. 276-90.
‘Afterword’ (2005), Orientalism (1978), Edward Said. Pp. 329-354. London: Penguin.
Aijaz Ahmad, ‘Orientalism and After’, Williams and Chrisman Reader, pp. 162-71.
A Tempest (1969), Aimé Césaire
Aimé Césaire, ‘Discourse on Colonialism’, excerpts available in the Williams and Chrisman
Reader, pp 172-180.
Léopold Sédar Senghor, ‘Negritude: A Humanism of The Twentieth Century’, Williams and
Chrisman Reader, pp. 27-35.
Autumn of the Patriarch (2006 [1975]), Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
‘The Solitude of Latin America’ (1982), Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech, Gabriel Garcia
Marquez. https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/literature/1982/marquez/lecture/
‘Of Mimicry and Man: the ambivalence of colonial discourse’, in The Location of Culture
(1994), Homi K. Bhabha. London: Routledge.
Season of Migration to the North (1969 [1966]), Tayeb Salih.
‘On the Abolition of the Department of English’, pp. 438-442/pp. 145-150, The Post-colonial
Studies Reader (1995), eds. Bill Ashcroft, Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin, London
and New York: Routledge/ Homecoming (1972), Ngugi wa Thiong’o, London:
Heinemann.
“Reflections on “Can the Subaltern Speak?”: Subaltern Studies After Spivak”, Partha
Chatterjee, pp.81-86; and “Postcolonial Studies: Now That’s History”, Ritu Birla, pp.
87-99. Can the Subaltern Speak?: Reflections on the History of an Idea (2010), ed.
Rosalind C. Morris. New York: Columbia UP
Joothan (2008[1997]), Omprakash Valmiki. Trans. Arun Prabha Mukherjee. New York:
Columbia UP
Funny Boy (1994), Shyam Selvadurai.
ENG347 Popular Fiction
This course shall introduce debates around popular fiction as well as some readings from
popular fiction from Britain and South Asia in the 20th century. The course will unpack
theoretical categories such as “popular”, “culture” and “taste” fundamental to engaging
with the texts as well as undertake a close reading of fiction (novels, graphic novels and
short stories) from Britain and South Asia focusing on genres like crime and detective fiction,
romance, children’s literature and the graphic novel.
Primary Texts
Pride and Prejudice, Jane Austen, 1813.
The Murder of Roger Ackroyd, Agatha Christie, 1926.
Haroun and the Sea of Stories, Salman Rushdie, 1990.
Bhimayana, Subhash Vyam, S. Anand, Srividya Natarajan, Durga Bai, 2011.
14
The Zoya Factor, Anuja Chauhan, 2008.
ENG348 Literature and the Non-Human
This course focuses on Anglophone fiction, non-fiction, poetry, film, and music which
visibilize and acknowledge the agency of non-human entities such as plants, animals, and
insects in shaping the world around us. Covering texts from the eighteenth to the twenty-
first century, it considers the ethical implications of sharing responsibility with such agents
for environmental protection and meaning making. Most importantly, it is interested in
reading against the grain of a so-far taken-for-granted anthropocentrism. (3:1:0).
Prerequisites: none.
Primary Texts
Antony and the Johnsons. I am a Bird Now.
Baxter, Stephen. Evolution.
Cassels, Walter Richard. “Llewellyn.”
Coetzee, J. M. The Lives of Animals. (Selections)
Darwin, Erasmus. The Botanic Garden, Part II: Containing the Loves of the Plants, a Poem.
With Philosophical Notes. (Selections)
Ehrlich, Pippa, and James Reed, dir. My Octopus Teacher.
Erdrich, Louise. The Plague of Doves.
Kimmerer, Robin Wall. Braiding Sweetgrass: Indigenous Wisdom, Scientific Knowledge and
the Teachings of Plants. (Selections)
Pariat, Janice. Everything the Light Touches. London: The Borough Press, 2022.
Pinera, David Suro, and Gary Paul Nabhan. Agave Spirits: The Past, Present, and Future of
Mezcals. (Selections)
ENG440 Contemporary Forms of Fiction
In this course we shall, having studied various kinds of fiction writing, look at other forms of
fiction making, including role-playing games (RPG), graphic novels, movies, and TV shows.
The intention is to attempt to understand the difference between reading a more or less
structured piece of literature, and forms that at this point in time seem more free-flowing
and less deterministic. The following issues will be discussed:
Form and Content, Graphic Narratives and Visual Theory, Reality, Virtuality, Simulation,
Virtual Reality, Concept Albums (music), Digital Gaming and its Implication for Gaming, and
the question ‘Why does a Game Need a Story?’ (3:1:0). Prerequsites: none
Primary Texts
Neil Gaiman, "Ramadan" from The Sandman: Preludes and Nocturnes (1989)
Will Eisner, Theory of Comics and Sequential Art (1985)
TV Show: Stranger Things (2016)
Sigmund Freud, The Uncanny (1919)
Video Game: TBD
Jean Baudrillard, Simulations and Simulacra (1981)
Nick Cave, Murder Ballads (1996)
David Atkinson, "Magical Corpses: Ballads, Intertextuality, and the Discovery of Murder"
(1999)
15
ENG441 Unlocking The Literary Through Feminist Theory
This is a survey course designed to introduce students to feminist theory. We will trace the
intellectual history of feminism through landmark texts, examine feminist theory and literary
criticism and read representative examples of l’ecriture feminine. (3:1:0). Prerequisites:
none.
Primary Texts
Mary Wollstonecraft, A Vindication of the Rights of Women (1792), selections.
Alice Duer Miller, Are Women People? A Book of Rhymes for Suffrage Times (1915),
selections.
Virginia Woolf, “A room of one’s own” (1929).
Simone de Beauvoir, The Second Sex (1949), selections.
Betty Friedan, “The Problem that has No Name,” The Feminine Mystique (1963).
Valerie Solanas, SCUM Manifesto (1968).
New York Radical Women, Notes from the Second Year: Women's Liberation (1970),
selections.
Kate Millett, “Theory of Sexual Politics,” Sexual Politics (1970).
Shulamith Firestone, “The Dialectic of Sex,” The Dialectic of Sex (1970).
John Berger, Ways of Seeing Ep. 2 “The Female Nude” (1972).
Audre Lorde, “The Master’s Tools Will Never Dismantle the Master’s House” (1979).
Sandra M. Gilbert and Susan Gubar, The Madwoman in the Attic (1979), selections.
Monique Wittig, “One is Not Born A Woman” (1981).
Margaret Atwood, The Handmaid’s Tale (1985).
Partha Chatterjee, “The Nationalist Resolution of the Women's Question” (1987).
Chandra Talpade Mohanty, “Under Western Eyes: Feminist Scholarship and Colonial
Discourses” (1988).
Nancy Armstrong, Desire and Domestic Fiction (1990), selections.
bell hooks, “The Oppositional Gaze: Black Female Spectators,” 1992.
Rebecca Solnit, “Men explain things to me” (2008, 2012).
Saadia Toor, “Imperialist Feminism Redux” (2012).
Gill Plain and Susan Sellers, A History of Feminist Literary Criticism (2007).
ENG444 Crafting Short Fiction
This course will look at the short story from 1000 to 3000 words. Students will study
exemplary texts in class. They will discuss the nuts and bolts of writing fiction such as point
of view, creation of character, and plot. They do that in the Fundamentals of Creative
Writing course as well. However, here they will do it in far greater detail. Furthermore, they
will study setting, writing dialogue, editing and revising, and also use workshopping
techniques extensively. In addition to the creative writing, they will write a critical
commentary which will make them aware of the fact that the creative and critical go
together. For grading purposes they will produce two stories each, plus a critical
commentary for both stories. It would help if students taking this course have already taken
ENG340 ‘The Fundamentals of Creative Writing.’
In the first half of the course, we will focus on the shorter 1500-word story. After the mid-
term, we will focus on the 2,500-word story. Through a mixture of lecture and discussion,
students will focus on the intricacies of plot, characterisation, point of view, voice and other
important attributes of writing fiction. Students will also learn to utilise workshopping
techniques, which will enable them to become better critics of their own and other people’s
work. Prerequisites: ENG340.
Primary Texts
16
Ernest Hemingway, ‘Hills like White Elephants’
Raymond Carver, ‘A Small, Good Thing’’
Jhumpa Lahiri, ‘When Mr Pirzada Came to Dine’’
James Joyce, ‘Araby’
Anton Chekhov, ‘The Grasshopper’
Etgar Keret, ‘Lieland’
Junot Diaz, Miss Lora
Daniyal Mueenuddin, ‘Nawabdin Electrician’
Sol Stein, ‘Stein On Writing’
ENG445 World Folk Literature
This course is a survey of folk literature identifying archetypes, themes, and motifs, orally
transmitted literature across space and time. Students will begin by learning key concepts of
folklore scholarship: culture, tradition, performance, genre, the local/global distinction, the
folk/popular divide, and the dynamics of the customary and innovative in folklore
production. Through an exploration of these concepts students will develop an expansive
definition of folk literature; the way that folk expressions live among people i.e. tellers and
audiences, collectors and translators; adapting themselves to changing times, circumstances
and metaphysical spaces. The course will focus on the transmission and transformation of
cultural knowledge and practice in situations of want and plenty, peace and conflict. (3:1:0).
Prerequisites: none.
Primary Texts
Dundes, Alan. 1980. “Who are the Folk?” in ‘Interpreting Folklore’ - Book Chapter III.
Zipes, Jack. 2003. “Once There Were Two Brothers Named Grimm.” in Introduction to the
Complete Fairy Tales of the Brothers Grimm, 3rd ed. New York: Bantam. xxiii-xxxvi.
Propp V. (1968) “Discussion of Tale-Types and Motifs,” in Morphology of the Folktale.
University of Texas Press, Chapters 2-4
Kirin Narayan, 1993; “Refractions of the Field at Home: American Representations of Hindu
Holy Men in the 19th and 20th Centuries,” in Cultural Anthropology 8(4):476-509
Regina Bendix, 1989 Tourism and Cultural Displays: Inventing Traditions for Whom? The
Journal of American Folklore 102 (404): 131-146.
Sadhana Naithani (2006) ‘In Quest of Indian Folktales,’ Orient Blackswan; Chapter 3
Katherine Borland 1991; ‘That's Not what I Said: Interpretive Conflict in Oral Narrative
Research’; Routledge
Films:
Ever After (1998) by Andy Tennant – with Drew Barrymore in a new version of “Cinderella”
(with Leonardo da Vinci as ‘godmother’)
ENG446 Vernacular Literary Practices
This course will highlight the historical emergence and development of vernaculars in
European and world literature. Students will be introduced to major theoretical
formulations about vernaculars by writers and theorists. There will be special focus on
debates around vernacular literary practice in India. The goal of the course is to introduce
students to the idea that there is a profound fissure at the heart of literature between
hegemonic concepts of the literary versus minority or non- elite; controversies and debates
that circulate around the notion of the vernacular constitute one way to get at this fissure
and analyze it. (3:1:0). Prerequisites: none.
Primary Texts
17
Module One: Histories of the Emergence of Vernacular Languages –Literatures (Four
Weeks)
Introduction to the course: Definitions and Delineations
Benedict Anderson, ’’Old Languages, New Models,” Imagined Communities ; Reflections on
the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. New York: Verso, Chapter 5
Sheldon Pollock, ’’The Cosmopolitan Vernacular,’’ Journal of Asian Studies. Volume 57, Issue
1 (Available on JSTOR)
G.N. Devy, After Amnesia: Tradition and Change in India Literary Criticism. Hyderabad: Orient
Longman, Chapter 1
Namwar Singh, “De-colonising the Indian Mind,” Indian Literature: Sahitya Akademi Bi-
monthly Journal. Vol. 151, Sept. to Oct. 1992, pp, 145 - 156
Module Two: Debates around the concept of vernaculars ( Three Weeks)
Chinua Achebe, “ Named for Victoria, Queen of England,” Hopes and Impediments: Selected
Essays, 1965 --- 1987 (1988), 30 -39
Ngugi Wa Thiongo, ’The Language of African Fiction” Decolonizing the Mind: The Politics of
Language in African Literature (1986), 63-86
Sujit Mukherjee, “ A Link Literature for India,“ in Translation as Discovery and Other Essays on
Indian Literature in English Translation. Hyderabad: Orient Longman, 1994
Module Three: The possibilities and limitations of literary translation ( Three Weeks)
Sujit Mukherjee, “ Transcreating Translation, “ in Translation and Culture: Indian Perspectives.
Ed. G.J.V.Prasad. Delhi: 2010, 168 – 177,
Paul St. Pierre, “ Translation in a Plurilingual Post-colonial Context: India, “ in Translation and
Culture: Indian Perspectives. Ed. G.J.V.Prasad. Delhi: 2010, 54 - 63
Dilip Chitre, ( Namdeo Dhasal ) “A Translator’s Delight and Despair,” in Namdeo Dhasal: Poet
of the Underworld. Poems 1972 – 2006, 174 – 180
Module Four: Language, Literature, Nationhood ( Three Weeks )
U.R. Ananthmurthy “ Towards a Concept of a New Nationhood: Languages and Literatures of
India.”Lecture delivered at Institute of Physics, Bhuvaneshwar, India, on 3
September, 2006 ( Available online )
Christopher R. King, The Hindi Movement in Nineteenth Century North India. New Delhi: O.U.P
1994
Alok Rai, Hindi Nationalism. New Delhi: Orient Blackswan, 2000
Alok K. Mukherjee, English Education and the Formation of Alternative Hegemonies in
India. New Delhi: Orient BlackSwan, 2009
ENG447 Literary Culture of the Enlightenment and Romanticism
This course seeks to familiarize students with the characteristic impulses that went into the
literary culture associated with the European Enlightenment and Romanticism. Beginning
with excerpts from Voltaire and Rousseau , we will move to themes such as women and the
Enlightenment , reason and liberty, conservative literary culture in the age of reason,
Romanticism and the limits of Enlightenment reason, Romantic poetry and the French
Revolution, Romanticism and nature, Romanticism and the imagination. (3:1:0).
Prerequisites: none.
Primary Texts
Unit 1 Voltaire, Treatise on Tolerance ( excerpts)
Rousseau, Discourse on Inequality ( excerpts)
Mary Wollstonecraft, Vindication of the Rights of Women (excerpts)
Unit 2 Jonathan Swift, A Modest Proposal
Alexander Pope , Dunciad Book 1.
18
Unit 3 Mary Shelly, Frankenstein
Unit 4. William Blake, “London”
P B Shelley “Ode to the West Wind”
Samuel Taylor Coleridge , “Kubla Khan”
William Wordsworth , “Intimations of Immortality”
John Keats, “Ode to Autumn”
Ann Finch, “A Nocturnal Reverie”
Geetanjali Shree, Mai
Michael Ondaantje, “The Passions of Lalla”, Running in the Family.
ENG448 Anthropocene Fictions: Technology, Environment and the Posthuman
Proposed by Paul J. Crutzen and Eugene F. Stoermer in 2000 as a new geological epoch
which takes into account human impact on the planet’s stratigraphic record, and rejected in
2024 by the Subcommission on Quaternary Stratigraphy, the body in charge of recognizing
geological time units as a new epoch, the Anthropocene, as a critical notion, requires
constant redefinition and reassessment since its its scope incessantly expanding and its
meanings are ever in flux. This course synthesizes anti-, non- or post-anthropocentric views
challenging the dominant discourses and practices that place humans at the center of the
world, with special emphasis on the contribution of literary studies to the field. By exploring
diverse literary texts and theoretical frameworks, this course aims to offer insights into the
complexities of human-environment interactions. It is particularly focused on how literary
interventions reconsider established narratives and envision alternative futures. (3:1:0).
Prerequisites: none.
Primary texts
Jason W. Moore, "The Capitalocene, Part I: On the Nature and Origins of Our Ecological
Crisis"
Donna Haraway, "Anthropocene, Capitalocene, Plantationocene, Chthulucene: Making Kin"
Anna Tsing, “Earth Stalked by Man”
Dipesh Chakrabarty, "The Climate of History: Four Theses"
Bruno Latour, Facing Gaia: Eight Lectures on the New Climatic Regime (selections)
Amitav Ghosh, "The Great Derangement: Climate Change and the Unthinkable"
Rob Nixon, "Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the Poor"
Vandana Shiva, Earth Democracy: Justice, Sustainability, and Peace (selections)
Vandana Singh. Ambiguity Machines.
Ursula K. Heise, "The Hitchhiker's Guide to Ecopoetics"
Lawrence Buell, The Future of Environmental Criticism: Environmental Crisis and Literary
Imagination (selections)
Timothy Morton Hyperobjects: Philosophy and Ecology After the End of the World
(selections)
N. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature,
and Informatics (selections)
Anthropocene Reading:Literary History in Geologic Times Edited by Tobias Menely and Jesse
Oak Taylor (selections)
One of the following novels: Yun Ko-eun, The Disaster Tourist/ Emmi Itaranta, The Memory
of Water/ Shubhangi Swarup, Latitudes of Longing/ Uzma Aslam Khan, Thinner than
Skin
Kim Stanley Robinson. The Ministry for the Future
Mad Max: Fury Road (2015) - Directed by George Miller
Okja (2017) - Directed by Bong Joon-ho
19
Department Faculty and Their Areas of Specialization
Vikram Kapur, Ph.D. (University of East Anglia), Professor and Head.
Creative Writing, Journalism, Modern and contemporary literature.
Sambudha Sen, Ph.D. (University of Delhi), Professor.
Medicine, sanitation, and the body in Victorian culture; Print and visual culture in 19th
century England; The novels of Charles Dickens and William Makepeace Thackeray; The early
novel in India; Novel theory; Visual representations of nineteenth century Calcutta and
London; Nineteenth Century Modernities.
Tulika Chandra, Ph.D. (Jawaharlal Nehru University), Professor.
Folklore, Translation, Development of Language, English Language Teaching, Phonetics,
Language Acquisition Business communication, Language skills.
Aakriti Mandhwani, Ph.D. (SOAS, University of London), Associate Professor.
Book and Magazine History, Cultural Studies, Popular Literature, South Asian and Hindi
Literature and Literary History, History of Libraries in South Asia.
Gatha Sharma, Ph.D. (Mahrishi Dayanand Saraswati University), Associate Professor.
Corpus Linguistics; Language Change; Long 18th Century Literature, Translation Studies, NLP
and Sanskrit.
Gautama Polanki, Ph.D. (EFL University, Hyderabad), Associate Professor.
Narrative Theory, Reader-Response Theory, Cognitive Poetics, Postmodernist fiction.
Teja Varma Pusapati, D.Phil (University of Oxford), Associate Professor.
Victorian literature and Culture, especially the developments in professional authorship,
women’s writing, journalism and the periodical press, newspaper and magazine culture,
feminist writing, and imperial print networks.
Chinmay Sharma, Ph.D. (SOAS University of London), Assistant Professor.
Cultural Studies, Comparative Literature, Postcolonial Literature and Theory, South Asian
Studies, World Literature, Hindi Literature, Religious Studies, Screen, Performance, Visual
and Print Cultures of South Asia in 20th and 21st Centuries.
Chinmaya Lal Thakur, Ph.D. (La Trobe University), Assistant Professor.
Postcolonial literatures and cultures; Philosophy and theory of the novel; Modernist
literatures and cultures; Continental philosophy—especially the works of Martin Heidegger
and Jacques Derrida; The contemporary global novel; Literary criticism and theory.
Diviani Chaudhuri, Ph.D (Binghamton University, SUNY), Assistant Professor.
World Literature, Visual and Material Cultures of the Middle-East, North Africa and South
Asia, Women’s writing.
Sreejata Paul, Ph.D. (IIT Bombay/Monash University dual-badged degree), Assistant
Professor. Gender Studies, Queer Studies, Islam in South Asia, Transnational Literary
Networks, Intellectual History, Environmental Humanities, Plant Humanities.
20
Vinayak Das Gupta, Ph.D. (Trinity College Dublin), Assistant Professor.
Digital Cultures, Digital Curation, History of Photography in South Asia, Linked Data and
Semantic Web technologies, Text Analysis, Data Visualisation, Participatory Engagement in
Academic Research.
21