DEPARTMENT OF MATHEMATICS
SCHOOL OF NATURAL SCIENCES
UNDERGRADUATE PROSPECTUS
2024
www.snu.edu.in
Contents
Overview of the Department ............................................................................................................. 2
Mission of the Undergraduate Program in Mathematics .................................................................... 4
Learning Outcomes of the Undergraduate Program in Mathematics .................................................. 4
Faculty .............................................................................................................................................. 5
B.Sc. (Research) Mathematics ............................................................................................................ 6
Minor in Mathematics ....................................................................................................................... 8
Specializations in Mathematics .......................................................................................................... 9
Your First Year as a Mathematics Major ........................................................................................... 10
Activities ......................................................................................................................................... 12
Course Catalog ................................................................................................................................ 13
Contact Us ....................................................................................................................................... 16
1 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
Overview of the Department
The Department of Mathematics established in 2011, is one of the founding departments at
the Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence (Deemed to be university).
The faculty at the department are active researchers in diverse areas such as Functional
analysis, Optimization, Algebra, Complex systems, Artificial intelligence and Mathematical
finance. This research transcends into our BSc (Research) Mathematics programme in the
form of undergraduate thesis which opens up avenues to higher academic degrees,
placements and internships in popular emerging technologies.
Empowerment through rigorous learning and research in fundamental areas of
mathematics and emerging technologies is at the core of the undergraduate programme.
Students have an opportunity to choose their electives from a wide variety of pure and
applied mathematics courses to tailor their degree according to their aptitude and ambition
highlighting interdisciplinary and the multidisciplinary nature of the university. The
Department offers undergraduate thesis and specializations in Applied algebra,
Mathematical finance, and Statistical learning & Artificial intelligence, as a mandatory credit
requirement.
The faculty at the Department of Mathematics is constantly striving to explore new and
emerging transdisciplinary domains of knowledge which are relevant to societal benefit and
sustainable development goals, like Human-nature interaction and Artificial intelligence.
Some of the frontier areas in which the faculty has reputed publications include Complex
systems modelling, Statistical learning, Minimal surfaces, and Mathematical finance. The
Department’s engagement with these emerging paradigms of learning promotes novel
dimensions to our research focus that transcends to the Doctoral programme which has
these as thrust areas in addition to modern areas in Functional analysis, Algebra,
Optimization, and Geometry.
The Department has been conferred the DST-FIST grant in 2015 towards setting up
a Departmental Research Computer Lab, as well as a dedicated Department Library. In
addition to organising the National Conference in Complex Networks and a workshops in
Zero Mean Curvature, the Department has been regularly hosting important national
conferences and schools such as the Annual Foundational School, and Advanced
Instructional School, organized by the National Board of Higher Mathematics.
The department also offers a Minor in Mathematics for students not majoring in
Mathematics can complete a Minor in Mathematics by earning appropriate course credits
from the department.
Our alumni have gone on to further studies in mathematics, economics and data analytics
in leading institutions like the ETH Zurich, National University of Singapore, University of
Bonn, Dublin City University, Institute of Mathematical Sciences (Chennai), Tata Institute
of Fundamental Research (Mumbai), University of Göttingen (Germany), Institute of
Higher Economics (Russia), Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology (Russia),
University of Chicago (USA), Arizona State University (USA), and Delhi School of
Economics. Some have taken up jobs in academia as well as in industry.
2 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
Department photograph with graduating Prof. R. Bapat giving a glimpse of Spectral
batch of 2023. graph theory to Undergraduate and Graduate
students.
Undergraduate students in the Department The Department of Mathematics is housed in
Library, set up under a DST-FIST grant. the School of Natural Sciences.
The Mathematics Society of the Faculty members with the founding batch of
department strives to promote students’ BSc (Research) Mathematics 2011.
independent thinking and critical ability
in mathematics by organizing a variety
of activities such as student seminars,
talks, workshops, and games.
3 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
Mission of the Undergraduate Program in Mathematics
Our fundamental mission is to empower the students through rigorous training in
fundamental areas of mathematics and in emerging technologies. This enables our students
to pursue careers and achieve leadership roles in both academia and industry. We promote
critical thinking through training in logical reasoning, the nature and types of proof,
abstraction, the presentation and analysis of data. We enable students to realise and develop
their interests through a diverse set of elective courses as well as opportunities for research
with faculty mentors. Students are also exposed to the connections between mathematics
and other disciplines.
Our undergraduate program is further distinguished by the following features:
 Melting of the artificial barriers between pure and applied mathematics and between
mathematics and other disciplines.
 Training in modern computing skills and applications to real-world problems.
 Accessibility to students from diverse backgrounds.
Learning Outcomes of the Undergraduate Program in
Mathematics
Through their study of the core undergraduate mathematics curriculum and their choice of
elective courses, all Shiv Nadar University mathematics majors develop their ability to:
 Formulate and express mathematical statements and arguments.
 Translate intuitive understanding into formal definitions and proofs.
 Solve new problems.
 Abstract from the particular to the general.
 Communicate mathematical ideas through oral and written presentations.
 Create mathematical models for applications in other disciplines, especially physics,
economics, biology and data science.
 Show individual ability and creativity through participation in projects and research.
4 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
Faculty
The faculty members of the department of mathematics at SNIOE have studied or worked
at leading institutions. Their mathematical interests vary widely across pure and applied
mathematics.
Faculty Member Designation Teaching/Research Interest
Dr. Sanjeev Agrawal Professor Functional Analysis, Operator
Theory, Error Correcting Codes,
Encryption, Mathematics
Education
Dr. Sudeepto Professor & Complex systems, Game
Bhattacharya Head theory, Network Theory,
Mathematical Modeling
Dr. Samit Bhattacharyya Associate Applied Mathematics and
Professor Computational Biology
Dr. Indranil Biswas Senior Algebraic geometry,
Professor Differential geometry
Dr. Priyanka Grover Associate Matrix Analysis,
Professor Operator Theory
Dr. Neha Gupta Assistant Quantum Groups, Category Theory
Professor
Dr. Amber Habib Professor Representation Theory,
Mathematical Finance
Dr. Qazi Azhad Jamal Assistant Professor
Probability and Statistics
Dr. Ajit Kumar Assistant Partial Differential Equations, Finite
Professor Element Method
Dr. Pradip Kumar Assistant Professor Differential Geometry
Dr. Sneh Lata Assistant Frame theory, Operator
Professor & Theory and Function Theory
Graduate
Advisor
Dr. A. Satyanarayana Associate Professor Algebraic Graph Theory, Discrete
Reddy Mathematics, Algebraic Number
Theory
Dr. Niteesh Sahni AssociateProfessor Artificial Intelligence,
Mathematical modelling,
Harmonic Analysis
Dr. Charu Sharma Assistant Professor Mathematical Finance, Statistical
Modelling
&
Dr. Santosh A U s n s d o e c r i g a r t a e d P ua r t o e f A e d ss v o is r o r Medical image analysis, Image
Singh reconstruction, Filter bank theory,
Computational photography, Light
field and Optimization technique
5 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
Dr. TSSK Rao Distinguished Professor Harmonic Analysis,
Approximation theory
Dr. Parul Gupta
Commutative Algebra,
Assistant Professor
Number Theory
6 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
B.Sc. (Research) Mathematics
The basic undergraduate degree program offered by the Department of Mathematics is
B.Sc. (Research) in Mathematics. By taking appropriate elective courses, in consultation
with the Undergraduate Advisor of the Department, a student can also be eligible for
award of one of the following:
 B.Sc. (Research) in Mathematics with a Mathematics Specialization
 B.Sc. (Research) in Mathematics with a Minor
Every mathematics undergraduate student of the University is required to take a number
of credits from courses broken up into the following categories:
a) CCC (Core Common Curriculum courses offered by the university)
b) UWE (University Wide Electives; courses so designated and offered by
departments other than Mathematics)
c) Core Mathematics Courses (“Major Core”)
d) Elective Mathematics Courses (“Major Elective”)
e) Undergraduate Thesis
The minimum credit requirements are described below.
B.Sc. (Research) in Mathematics
S.No. Category Credits
1 CCC
18
2 UWE 18
3 Major Core 72
4 Major Electives A 1
5 Major Elective B
6 Floating* 66
7 Undergraduate Thesis 1 82
Total 150
Floating* 6 credits can be chosen from either CCC or UWE or Major Electives.
The Elective A credits have to be earned from a basket of 8 courses. These courses lay
the foundations for advanced specializations or higher studies in pure mathematics. The
Elective B credits can be earned from any major electives offered by the Department of
Mathematics (including the Elective A basket).
The basic degree can be supplemented by Specializations in particular aspects of
Mathematics and its applications. Two Specializations are available to students admitted
to B.Sc. (Research) in Mathematics in 2023:
1. Mathematical Finance
2. Applied Algebra
These can be completed using the Elective slots and are described in detail later.
7 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
A student must complete all requirements for the degree in a minimum of three years and
a maximum of six years.
The Minor requirements are set by the department offering it. It is expected that a
student will complete the minor by concentrating his/her UWE choices accordingly,
though a student may need to take extra UWE credits to complete a particular Minor.
Semester-wise Plan
A typical path through the B.Sc. (Research) in Mathematics program is shown below.
Students may be allowed by the Department Undergraduate Committee to alter the
sequence of core courses in order to ease goals such as obtaining a Minor from another
department, or to complete prerequisites for a summer program or internship.
Similarly, each student will have individually guided choice in timing CCC, UWE and
Mathematics Elective courses.
Yr Monsoon Semester Credits Spring Semester Credits
MAT100 Foundations 19 MAT102 Calculus II 19
MAT101 Calculus I MAT132 Vector Calculus and
CSD101 Introduction Geometry
1
to Programming MAT150 Mathematical Modelling
MAT160 Linear Algebra I UWE
CCC CCC
MAT184 Probability 19 MAT221 Real Analysis II 19
MAT220 Real Analysis I MAT280 Numerical Analysis I
MAT240 Algebra I MAT241 Algebra II
2
UWE MAT283 Introduction to Statistics
CCC UWE or CCC
MAT230 Ordinary 19 MAT330 Partial Differential 19
Differential Equations Equations
MAT360 Linear Algebra II MAT399 Undergraduate
3
Major Elective Seminar
UWE Major Elective
CCC Major Elective
UWE or CCC
MAT499 Undergraduate Thesis 18 MAT499 Undergraduate Thesis 18
Major Elective Major Elective
4 Major Elective UWE
UWE CCC
CCC
Most CCC courses are of 1.5 credits and are taught over a half-semester. Some are 3
credits and the compulsory CCC on Environment is of 4 credits. Similarly, UWE courses
can have different credits, and are typically for 3 or 4 credits. The UWE and CCC slots
shown above are therefore indicative only.
8 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
Minor in Mathematics
Undergraduate students of the university who are not majoring in Mathematics have the
option to take a Minor in Mathematics. A Minor in Mathematics can serve two distinct
functions (apart from enjoying its beauty and intellectual stimulation!):
 Acquiring the academic background for higher studies in mathematics.
 Acquiring modeling and computational skills for applications of mathematics in
other disciplines or in industry.
Academic Requirements
You have to acquire a minimum of 20 credits as University Wide Electives (UWE) from
the courses offered by the Department of Mathematics. These credits must satisfy the
following minimum requirements:
(1)At least 8 credits from the following: MAT 101 (Calculus I), MAT 102 (Calculus II),
MAT 132 (Vector Calculus and Geometry), MAT 160 (Linear Algebra I), MAT 184
(Probability), MAT 220 (Real Analysis I), MAT 230 (Ordinary Differential
Equations), MAT 240 (Algebra I), MAT 280 (Numerical Analysis), MAT 284
(Probability & Statistics).
(2)At least 8 credits from all other MAT courses numbered 200 or above, available as
UWE, and not included in item (1).
Your choice of courses is subject to the following restrictions:
 A course cannot count towards both Major and Minor requirements. For example,
Economics students cannot count MAT 101 towards the Minor because it is a
compulsory course in their Major.
 Certain course combinations are not allowed. If you have already credited a course
with significant overlap with a certain MAT course, or a more advanced course
than the MAT course, you may not earn credit for the Minor from that MAT course.
A list of such banned combinations will be published before each semester’s
course registration.
The Undergraduate Advisor for Mathematics will help you work out an appropriate
choice of courses depending on your interests and background.
9 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
Specializations in Mathematics
Students of B.Sc. (Research) in Mathematics can choose to specialize in certain areas,
especially in applications of Mathematics.
Mathematical Finance is a modern study area where advanced mathematical methods
are used to create and add immense value in a practical environment. Typically banks,
insurance companies and institutional investors rely on mathematical models to drive
both their investment and risk management strategies. The study of Mathematical
Finance provides ample opportunities for continuation into research. Alternatively it can
be essential in finding employment in many areas in the financial industry.
Modern algebra, with its emphasis on the study of relationships and symmetry, has
brought greater clarity to all parts of mathematics and its applications. The specialization
in Applied Algebra offers the opportunity to study several topics in algebra which are
especially popular today, with applications as diverse as playing a scratched CD,
protecting online transactions, the design of statistical experiments, and representing
molecular structures.
To obtain a Specialization the student must complete the credit requirements listed
below.
 Specialization in Mathematical Finance:
o MAT 390 (Introduction to Mathematical Finance)
o Any three of MAT 490 (Discrete Time Finance), MAT 384 (Econometrics),
MAT 484 (Advanced Statistics), MAT394(Machine Learning through R),
MAT494(Deep Learning), MAT 388 (Optimization I), MAT 488 (Optimization
II), MAT 584 (Stochastic Processes), MAT 590 (Computational Finance),
 Specialization in Applied Algebra:
o MAT 440 (Elementary Number Theory)
o Any three of MAT 246 (Combinatorics), MAT 341 (Commutative Algebra), MAT
442 (Graph Theory), MAT 491 (Game Theory), MAT 542 (Cryptography), MAT
543 (Error Correcting Codes), MAT 544 (Combinatorial Design Theory)
1 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
0
Your First Year as a Mathematics Major
The first year of your undergraduate studies will be especially crucial. It typically takes a
student this long to transition from doing school mathematics to meeting the much higher
expectations of university mathematics. At SNIOE we have taken care to ensure a proper
transition so that at the end of the year you are well positioned to embark on a fruitful life
with mathematics.
First Semester
Foundations – This course provides an introduction to the nature of mathematics and
mathematical thinking, by taking up issues such as the concepts of axioms and proof, the
language of sets, functions and relations, the process of abstraction, and the skill of
problem-solving.
Calculus I – This course covers one variable calculus and applications. It uses the formal
foundations provided in parallel by Foundations and adds the geometric insights which
form the heart of Calculus. Calculus I forms the base for subsequent courses in advanced
vector calculus and real analysis as well as for applications in probability, differential
equations, optimization, etc.
Linear Algebra I – Linear Algebra provides the means for studying several quantities
simultaneously. A good understanding of Linear Algebra is essential in almost every area
of higher mathematics, and especially in applied mathematics. For example, Google’s
PageRank algorithm is based on the analysis of eigenvectors of a matrix that represents
the interlinking of webpages.
Introduction to Programming – Computers have dramatically affected the sciences
over the last 3 or 4 decades, and mathematics is not an exception. With the help of
computers we can easily
11 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
explore and gain insight into complicated situations. This course introduces you to
programming, algorithms and data structures using C Language.
Second Semester
Calculus II – This course covers infinite series and their applications as well several
variable differential calculus. The concepts and techniques covered here are used
extensively in the social and natural sciences as well as in engineering to study systems
with many dimensions.
Vector Calculus and Geometry – This course considers analytic geometry from the
modern viewpoint based on linear algebra. It also develops and uses vector calculus to
study geometric quantities like length, area, and volume. It culminates with the
generalizations of the Fundamental Theorem of calculus to two and three dimensions.
Mathematical Modelling – Mathematics has developed in close association with our
attempts at understanding and navigating the world. This course focusses on how real
world problems can be rephrased in the language of mathematics leading to a better
understanding and solution of those problems as well as to the further development of
mathematics.
Apart from these mathematics core courses, you should also take about 6 CCC credits and
3 UWE credits during your first year. These can be chosen from various offerings across
the university. The mathematics faculty members also float CCC courses which you can
select:
CCC 101 Mathematics in India – Mathematics had a rich history in ancient and medieval
India. Indian mathematicians made original contributions to algebra, number theory and
geometry; with the Kerala School making fundamental discoveries related to differential
calculus and infinite series two centuries before their full development by Newton and
Leibniz. This course provides an overview of the story of mathematics in India, and also
incorporates the social context and the connections with other cultures.
CCC 803 Art of Numbers – This course deals with two aspects of numbers. The first part
of the course takes up some patterns that exist in nature, to study them and understand
some of their applications. The second part looks at numbers as carriers of information
about our lives. We use spreadsheet programming to analyze the data in depth.
CCC 805 Data Analysis and Business Modelling Using Excel - The spreadsheet
program Excel is used by businesses to summarize, report and analyze data, as well as to
build analytic models to help your increase profit, reduce cost, or manage operations
more efficiently. This course teaches efficient use of tools and methods available in Excel
that can save you hours of time and improve approaches for analyzing important
business problems.
CCC 825 Shapes in Nature – Our world is full of interesting shapes and Mathematics
12 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
plays an important role in understanding and utilizing them. Conversely, our attempts to
understand these shapes lead to new mathematics. This course will consider shapes and
patterns that occur in nature, and their properties. For example, the geometry of
honeycombs, the patterns of mud cracks etc. will be discussed. Soap films and bubbles
and their stability are another fascinating topic with many ramifications.
Activities
The Department of Mathematics was one of the founding departments of Shiv Nadar
University. It is also among the largest and most active. We have organized national
conferences and summer schools as well as Colloquium talks, weekly seminars, and
school workshops. Some other activities are:
 The Mathematics Society organizes talks, movies, problem-solving sessions and
other mathematical activities.
 Visits by mathematicians from institutions such as ISI, IIT, TIFR, IISER, Stony
Brook University, etc.
Lecture by Prof. Pradeep Dubey, Department of Economics, Stony Brook University
Conferences and Schools organized by the Department of Mathematics
 Northern Regional Conference of the National Initiative in Mathematics Education
(2011, co-hosted with Ambedkar University, Delhi).
 Annual Conference of the Ramanujan Mathematical Society (2012)
 Annual Foundation School for PhD students (2015, funded by the National Centre
for Mathematics).
 Mathematical Training and Talent Search program (2015 and 2016, funded by the
13 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
National Board for Higher Mathematics).
 Advanced Instructional School in Matrix Analysis (2016, funded by the National
Centre for Mathematics).
 National Conference on Cross-Disciplinary Applications of Complex Networks (2018,
funded by Science and Engineering Research Board).
 Annual Conference of Indian Women and Mathematics (2018, funded by National
Board for Higher Mathematics and the International Mathematical Union’s
Committee for Women in Mathematics).
 Workshop on Zero Mean Curvature surfaces (2022)
14 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
Course Catalog
Brief descriptions of the core courses offered by the department to its undergraduate
majors are given below. (The first year courses were described earlier) The detailed
syllabi can be viewed on the SNIOE website.
Mathematics Core Courses
First Year (these were described earlier):
MAT 100 – Foundations
MAT 101 – Calculus I
MAT 102 – Calculus II
MAT 150 – Mathematical Modelling
CSD101 – Introduction to Programming
MAT 132 – Vector Calculus and Geometry
MAT 160 – Linear Algebra I
Second Year and After:
MAT 184 – Probability
Probability is the means by which we model the inherent randomness of natural
phenomena. This course introduces you to a range of techniques for understanding
randomness and variability, and for understanding relationships between quantities.
This course is a prerequisite for later courses in Statistics, Stochastic Processes and
Mathematical Finance.
MAT 220 – Analysis I
Provides a rigorous base for the geometric facts and relations that we take for granted
in one-variable Calculus. This is the foundational course for further study of topics in
pure or applied Analysis, such as Metric Spaces, Complex Analysis, Numerical Analysis,
and Differential Equations.
MAT 240 – Algebra I
Learning traditional Abstract Algebra in a contemporary style. The course covers the
standard algebraic structures of groups and rings, and highlights the connection
between groups and geometry through the idea of symmetry.
MAT 280 – Numerical Analysis
Numerical Analysis takes up the problems of practical computation that arise in
various areas of mathematics. The focus is on algorithms for obtaining approximate
solutions, and their implementation by computer programs. The software Matlab will
be extensively used.
15 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
16 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
MAT 221 – Analysis II
Continuing the work done in MAT 220 of understanding one-variable Calculus, this
course dwells on various aspects of functions on more general spaces, namely, metric
spaces. This lays the groundwork for the study of functions of several real variables
within the course, and of complex functions later.
MAT 241 – Algebra II
The course continues the work begun in Algebra I, on the one hand by extending the
study of groups to include group actions and applications, and on the other by studying
the abstract structures of rings and fields.
MAT 230 – Ordinary Differential Equations
Ordinary Differential Equations are fundamental to many areas of science. In this
course we learn how to solve large classes of them, how to establish that solutions exist
in others, and to find numerical approximations when exact solutions can’t be
achieved.
MAT 283 – Introduction to Statistics
In MAT 184 Probability, we learnt how mathematics can describe aspects of
randomness. In this course, we take up applications to real-world problems,
developing techniques for interpreting data and using statistics to choose between
competing explanations of phenomena as well as to decide whether certain apparent
phenomena are genuine.
MAT 330 – Partial Differential Equations
Partial Differential Equations involve functions of several variables – for example,
functions that depend on both location and time. PDEs are fundamental in many areas,
for example thermodynamics (heat equation), wave motion (wave equation), fluid
dynamics (Navier-Stokes equation), quantum mechanics (Schrodinger equation) and
even finance (Black-Scholes equation).
MAT 360 – Linear Algebra II
Linear Algebra I treated real and complex linear transformations up to the
diagonalizability of symmetric matrices. In this course we take up vector spaces over
arbitrary fields and reach more advanced results on expressing linear transformations
by appropriate simple matrices.
MAT 399 – Undergraduate Seminar
This is an introduction to the activity of research in mathematics. One aim is to help
students prepare for their undergraduate thesis by practicing, on a smaller scale, the
skills of literature survey, public presentation, and mathematical writing.
17 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
MAT499 – Undergraduate Thesis
This 2 semester long course can take a variety of forms, from a reading course on
advanced topics to computational work in an application of mathematics. MAT499
concludes with the submission of a written report and a public presentation.
Mathematics Elective Courses
Elective A: A student has to credit four of the following courses:
1. MAT388 Optimization I (contributes to specialization in Mathematical Finance)
2. MAT390 Introduction to Mathematical Finance (contributes to Specialization in
Mathematical Finance)
3. MAT394 Machine Learning through R
4. MAT 422 Metric Spaces
5. MAT424 Complex Analysis
6. MAT 440 Elementary Number Theory (contributes to Specialization in Applied
Algebra)
7. MAT442 Graph Theory (contributes to Specialization in Applied Algebra)
8. MAT622 Topology
Elective B: A sample of the elective courses offered in the past is given below:
1. MAT 341 Commutative Algebra
2. MAT 420 Probability and Measure
3. MAT 434 Computational PDE
4. MAT 444 Basic Category Theory
5. MAT 490 Discrete Time Finance
6. MAT494 Deep Learning
7. MAT 542 Cryptography
8. MAT 543 Error Correcting Codes
9. MAT 544 Combinatorial Design Theory
10.MAT 550 Algebraic Topology
Under Elective B students can also credit courses from the Elective A list as well as
graduate courses of the Department of Mathematics. They may also, after obtaining the
permission of the Department Undergraduate Committee, use credits from
mathematically oriented courses taught by other departments.
The full course catalog is available on the SNIOE website.
18 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University
Contact Us
For further details, please write to one of the following:
Dr. Dr.
Ass Professor & UG Advisor
TadPurroif Sersisnoirv a&s aH Seiavda Rama Charu Sharma
Krishna Rao istant
charu.sharma@snu.edu.in
Our postatl sasdrdkr.reasos@ iss: nu.edu.in
Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence Deemed to be University
NH - 91, Tehsil Dadri
Gautam Buddha Nagar
Uttar Pradesh - 201314
The SNIOE website is www.snu.edu.in. This provides detailed descriptions of the admission
process, fees and scholarships, and overall structure and rules of the undergraduate
program.
19 2024 Undergraduate Prospectus, Department of Mathematics, Shiv Nadar University