Prospectus B.Sc. (Research) Biotechnology
Department of Life Sciences
School of Natural Sciences
Shiv Nadar University
Gautam Buddha Nagar
UP-201314
B.Sc. (Research) Biotechnology
Overview
The Department of Life Sciences at Shiv Nadar University imparts teaching and research that
expand knowledge of biology and biotechnology. By introducing undergraduate students through
B.Sc. (Research) Biotechnology program to the fundamentals and advances of biology, the
Department prepares students with in-depth and wide knowledge related to biology and
applications, as well as the next generation of scholars and teachers. The Department’s teaching
and research fields of specialization include Biochemistry, Bacteriology, Cell biology, Cell
signalling, Molecular biology, Genetics, Neuroscience, Parasitology, Plant science, Virology and
Bioinformatics. Several faculty members have interdisciplinary research interests in Chemistry,
Physics and Engineering. The overall aim of the Biotechnology Major program is to effectively
engage students in learning, enhance their problem solving skills, to get deeper understanding of
the discipline.
Program outcomes:
 Apply knowledge of biology fundamentals and biotechnology specialization to the
solution of complex biology questions.
 Skills to design and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and
use rationale judgement to draw conclusions.
 An ability to apply biotechnology to produce solutions for public health and welfare.
 Acquire skills and knowledge of bioethics, biosafety and environmental norms.
 Carryout research and write effective scientific reports.
 To function effectively in diverse and multidisciplinary research setups.
 An ability to interact positively with global research and teaching community.
Laboratory Experience
The research going on in the Department of life sciences is multifaceted and interdisciplinary
which includes Virology, Oncology, Vascular Biology, Malaria, Bacteriology, Systems and
Synthetic Biology, Computational biology, Plant biology, Bioinformatics and Drug discovery.
The Department of Life Sciences has state of the art laboratories equipped with advanced
instruments like FACS Aria, Fluorescent and Confocal Microscopes, Real time PCR machines
and 2D gel electrophoresis. In addition to these there are Biosafety level 2 culture laboratories,
[2]
and animal and bacterial cell culture facilities equipped with Biosafety hoods, incubators,
circulating water baths, liquid nitrogen Cylinders, -70oC and -20 oC deep freezers.
Research Focus:
B.Sc. (Research) Biotechnology program is research driven and equips students with research
experience in academic setup. The program requires each student to engage in a research project
for six months to one year in their chosen topic. Students learn to formulate hypothesis, design
and performs experiments, analyze data and write scientific reports. Students also have a choice
to perform a semester of research in another university/ industry too.
Credit Requirements for Major in Biotechnology
Core Courses: Within the duration of UG program, a student is expected to complete 111
credits of courses, including core and electives.
UWE: Within the duration of UG program, a student is expected to complete a minimum of 18
credits of UWE offered by other departments of science, engineering, and humanities.
CCC: Within the duration of UG program, a student is expected to complete a minimum of 18
credits of CCC courses offered by all the departments of science, engineering, and humanities. A
total of 42 credits of combined CCC and UWE must be completed for UG program.
Life Sciences Course Catalog
Course Code Name of the Course No. of
Credits
I Semester L:T:P
BIO101 Fundamentals of Computers 2:0:1
CHY111 Chemical Principles 3:1:1
BIO102 Plant Sciences I 2:0:1
BIO103 Animal Sciences I 2:0:1
BIO104 Ecology and Environmental Sciences 2:0:1
MAT020 Basic Calculus 3:1:0
Total Credits for I semester 21
II Semester
[3]
CHY122 Basic Organic Chemistry I 2:1:1
MAT084 Basic Probability and Statistics 3:1:0
PHY108 Physics for Life 3:0:1
BIO105 Plant Sciences II 2:0:1
BIO106 Animal Sciences II 2:0:1
Total Credits for II semester 18
III Semester
BIO201 Cell Biology and Genetics 2:0:1
BIO202 Microbiology 2:0:1
BIO203/PHY255 Biophysics 2:0:1
BIO204 Biochemistry 2:0:1
Total Credits for III semester 12
IV Semester
BIO205 Bio-Analytical Techniques 2:0:1
BIO 206 Fundamentals of Molecular Biology 2:0:1
BIO 207 Immunology 2:0:1
BIO 208 Bioinformatics 2:0:1
Total Credits for IV semester 12
V Semester
BIO301 Animal Biotechnology 2:0:1
BIO302 Plant Biotechnology 2:0:1
BIO303 Recombinant DNA Technology 2:0:1
BIO 304 Industrial Biotechnology 2:0:1
Total Credits for V semester 12
VI Semester
[4]
BIO305 Genomics ,Proteomics & System Biology 3:0:0
BIO310 Biology of Infectious Diseases 3:0:0
BIO307 IPR, Patent Laws & Bioethics 3:0:0
Elective1 BIO308 Drug Design and Drug Development * 2:0:1
Elective2 BIO309 Cancer Biology * 3:0:0
Elective3 BIO313 Cell Signaling and Neurosciences* 2:0:1
Elective4 BIO314 Host Pathogen Interaction & Vascular Dysfunction* 2:0:1
* any one of the elective from the above 4 can be
selected
Total credits for VI semester 12
VII semester
BIO401 Research Methodology 3:0:0
BIO402 Internal Project Dissertation 9
Total Credits for VII semester 12
VIII semester
BIO403 Project Dissertation 12
Total Credits for VIII semester 12
Total course major credits 111
CCC/ UWE credits 42
( A minimum of 18 credits of each CCC and UWE
are required)
Total Credit requirement for B.Sc (Research) 153
Biotechnology
*One elective is mandatory for full-filling major degree requirement
[5]
B.Sc. (Research) Biotechnology Program
Learning outcomes of various courses
Semester I
BIO101 Fundamentals of Computers
(a) Work on linux machines.
(b) Make programs in PERL.
(c) Perform sequence analysis of laboratory generated or publically available sequence
data.
BIO102 Plant Sciences 1
(a) Understand and explain the fundamental concepts of plant classification,
identification and systematics.
(b) Use the morphological, anatomical and genetic information to derive phylogenetic
relationships or among various plant groups.
(c) Demonstrate the ability to differentiate various plant-like forms based on their
morphology and anatomy.
(d) Apply the knowledge of plant ecology and economic importance in various
biotechnological applications like agriculture, natural products, industry,
biomedicine.
BIO103 Animal Sciences 1
(a) Understand the evolution pattern and importance of different systems in
Invertebrates.
(b) Able to correlate the importance of different physiological processes in invertebrate
parasites like malaria, leishmania etc.
(c) Understand the similarities and differences between invertebrate and vertebrate
physiology and anatomy.
BIO104 Ecology and Environmental Sciences
(a) Obtain an idea about the wild life and conservation methods used.
(b) Learn the restoration strategies for ecological restoration.
(c) Lean about Biosphere reserves in India and their detailed method of working.
Semester II
BIO203 Plant Sciences II
(a) Understand and explain the fundamental concepts of plant metabolism.
(b) Understand molecular mechanisms of plant development
(c) Demonstrate ability to differentiate various plant-like forms based on their
morphology and anatomy.
Animal Sciences II
(a) Understand the physiology of cell and tissues.
(a) Correlate the importance of different physiological processes in invertebrate parasites
like malaria, leishmania etc.
[6]
(b) Understand the similarities and differences between invertebrate and vertebrate
physiology and anatomy.
Semester III
BIO201 Cell Biology and Genetics
(a) Discuss and attempt solving problems in most of the basic and advanced topics in
Cell Biology and basics of Genetics.
(b) Conduct basic experiments pertaining to cell biology.
BIO202 Microbiology
(a) Identify key concepts and skills that are central to microbiology
(b) Acquired skills for basic microbiology experiments
(c) Development of scientific competency that would have enduring and lasting value
beyond the classroom and laboratory.
BIO204 Biochemistry
(a) Define the structure and role and importance of biological molecules.
(b) Describe the major concepts of Biochemistry.
(c) Student develop skills perform and demonstrate biochemical assays.
Semester IV
BIO205, Bioanalytical Techniques
(a) Students will be able to learn bioanalytical techniques principles.
(b) Students can understand and operate standard laboratory equipment.
(c) Student develop skills perform and demonstrate biochemical assays.
BIO206, Fundamentals of Molecular Biology
(a) Able to understand molecular mechanisms of replication, transcription, regulation of
gene expression and translation.
(b) Applications of recombinant Gene Technology and its manipulations.
BIO207, Immunology
(a) Familiarize with basic concepts of immunology.
(b) Ability to differentiate function of immune system and basic immune cell types.
Semester V
BIO301, Animal Biotechnology
(a) Understand the application of all the molecular approaches in animal system.
(b) Learn basics and hands on learning about in vitro Cell and tissue culture.
BIO302 Plant Biotechnology
(a) Understand and explain the fundamental concepts of the plant regeneration and tissue
culture and its role in crop improvement.
(b) Use the available molecular tools to design strategies for genetic improvement of
crops and non-crop plant species.
[7]
(c) Demonstrate ability to think analytically by analysing different experimental
conditions and creating set of conditions to validate the outcomes.
BIO303 Recombinant DNA Technology
(a) Design the strategy of making a recombinant DNA
(b) Make a recombinant DNA for further processing like expressing a recombinant
protein, genome editing etc.
(c) Make genetically modified organisms.
(d) Design synthetic biological circuits.
BIO304, Industrial Biotechnology
(a) Acquire skills in basic industrial techniques producing commercially important
products.
(b) Develop the qualities and transferable skills necessary for their employment in
biotechnology sector
Semester VI
BIO305 Genomics, Proteomics & System Biology
(a) Understand advanced techniques such as Next Generation Sequencing and
(b) Learns proteomics such as mass spectrophotometer, 2D electrophoresis etc.,
BIO306 Biology of infectious diseases
(a) Will understand the biology behind infection, pathogenesis and role of innate immune
and adaptive immune system in infectious diseases.
Semester VII & VIII
Internal or external research project
(a) Learn formulate hypothesis, design and performs experiments, analyze data and write
scientific report.
(b) Can make significant contribution for a journal article.
[8]
Minor in Biotechnology
The Department of Life Sciences is offering a minor degree to students pursuing various major
degrees across university. The department has 10 seats reserved for students opting for a minor
degree. The criteria for selection of students for a minor will be based on the overall CGPA and
followed by an interview by the departmental committee.
For getting a minor degree the students have to complete a minimum of 21credits in Life Science
department, which includes some compulsory course work and some optional course work. The
four compulsory courses have to be completed by each student to receive the Minor degree.
Apart from these each student is required to take a minimum of three optional courses.
Each student opting for a minor degree has to pass in all the compulsory courses. The
compulsory courses are as listed below:
CODE Course Name Credits
BIO 201 Cell Biology and Genetics 3
BIO 202 Microbiology 3
BIO 204 Biochemistry 3
BIO 206 Fundamentals of Molecular Biology 3
All courses offered to B.Sc. (Research) in Biotechnology Major Students in the II, III, IV, V and
VI semesters can be taken as optional courses for the Minor degree. For details please see B.Sc.
(Research) Biotechnology syllabus.
The minimal credit requirement for a minor in biotechnology is 21 credits, out of which 12
credits are from compulsory courses
For queries please contact:
Undergraduate Advisor of Department of Life Sciences
Dr. Richa Priyadarshini
Email: richa.priyadarshini@snu.edu.in
[9]