Ashokankur Datta
School of Humanities and Social Sciences
Department of Economics

Research Interest:
Development Economics and Environmental Economics
Know more:
Click here

Education:
2012
, Ph.D., Indian Statistical Institute, New Delhi

Work Experience:
2011-2012
Post-Doctoral Fellow, Centre de Sciences Humaines, New Delhi
2010-2011
Fellow, Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment, Bengaluru

Journal Publications:
Higher Temperatures and Household Nutrition: Evidence from India (with Amlan Dasgupta and Ridhima Gupta), Food Policy, 135, 2025.
Gendered Time Use and its Heterogeneities: The Role of Region, Religion and Caste (with Aparajita Dasgupta),  Journal of Economics, Race, and Policy, 7, (2024)
Religious Institutions and Gendered Time Use: Evidence from Ramadan Festivities in India (with Aparajita Dasgupta),  Journal of Population Economics, Volume 37, 2024.
Ashokankur Datta and E. Somanathan. Climate Policy and Innovation in the Absence of Commitment. Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists. Volume 3. Number 4. p. 917-955. December 2016.
Ashokankur Datta. Incidence of Fuel Taxation in India, Energy Economics-Special Issue on Asian Energy, 32, 2010.

Books and Book Chapters (Authored / Edited / Reviewed):
Ashokankur Datta and Gunnar Kohlin. Tenure and forest management in India: Impacts on equity and efficiency of Van Panchayats in Uttarakhand in Stein T. Holden, Keijiro Otsuka & Klaus Deininger edited Land Tenure Reforms in Asia and Africa: Impacts on Poverty and Natural Resource Management. Palgrave Macmillan. 2013.
Ashokankur Datta. Are Fuel Taxes in India Regressive? In Thomas Sterner edited Fuel Taxes and the Poor:The Distributional Effects of Gasoline Taxation and Their Implications for Climate Policy. Resources for the Future Press. 2011.

Working Papers / Monographs / Policy Papers / Case Studies:
Aparajita Dasgupta and Ashokankur Datta. Are Gender Norms Systematic to Caste Institutions? Examining preferences through a Social Experiment in North Indian Villages. Ashoka University Discussion Paper 80. 2022.

Sponsored Research Projects / Consultancy / Creative Work / Exhibitions and Performances:
2018, Co-PI for Research Grant of around INR 1.2 million from Azim Premji University Research Grant Project for project titled 'Understanding the Puzzle of Declining Female Labour Force Participation in India'.