Prakash  Kumar
School of Humanities and Social Sciences
Department of Design

Biography:
Dr. Prakash Kumar holds a Ph.D. in Design from IIT Guwahati. He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Design, School of Humanities and Social Sciences at Shiv Nadar University. After completing his Mechanical Engineering, he was associated with ICICI Bank Ltd as Retail Infrastructure Manager. He joined IIT Guwahati to pursue his postgraduation in Design followed by his PhD research. His research interests include Tools and equipment design for cottage industries, Ergonomic studies related to workers in small, unorganized industries, Design for special needs and Design of context-specific solutions for people at the Bottom of Pyramid. He is also focused on the design and development of low-cost innovations. Among his achievements, he has filed 5 patents that are in their final phase of grant. He has been offered and he is, presently, completing a one-year fellowship in Biomedical Device Design at center for Healthcare Entrepreneurship, IIT Hyderabad. Besides, he has worked with NCERT on Designing Educational Kits for Students. He is also working on a project related to the Traditional Handloom Redesign funded by Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Government of India. He has been invited by Design Institutions like NID Kurukshetra to be a part of design student mentoring.

Research Interest:
Work tool equipment design for small scale industries/ cottage industries like equipment design for small fruit processing units Ergonomic study of issues related to workers in small, unorganized industries and design of context specific solutions  Design for people at the Bottom of Pyramid  Design and development of low cost innovations

Education:
2012 Ph.D. in Design IIT Guwahati
2006 Master of Design IIT Guwahati
2002 BE Mechanical Bharati Vidyapeeth's College of Engineering

Work Experience:
06/21 Present Associate Professor, Department of Design, School of Humanities a Social Sciences, Shiv Nadar University, Delhi-NCR
04/14-05/21 Assistant Professor, Department of Design, School of Humanities and Social Sciences, Shiv Nadar University, Delhi-NCR
05/05-05/07 Assistant Manager, ICICI Bank Ltd, Kolkata

Awards:
2017 Patent Filed - Apparatus for Peeling and Cutting pineapples (Ref. No. 201711038404 )
2022 Patent Filed- Egg boiling and peeling Device and method thereof (Ref. No. 202211012300)
2022 Patent filed - A sipper cum straw in the bottle and the method thereof (Ref. No. 202211012253)