Policy for On Campus Part Time
Jobs for UG and non-assistantship
bearing Masters Students
Policy # ST203 Policy for On Campus Part Time Jobs for UG and non-
assistantship bearing Masters Students V1.5
Shiv Nadar University (SNU) 2020. All rights reserved.
This document is meant for exclusive use of SNU. No part of the document may be copied, reproduced, stored in any retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronically, mechanically, or otherwise without prior written permission.
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
Release Control
Release Version
Details Released by Approved by
Date No:
Pre Release, the purpose of pre-
release is to inform all stake holders
Ram K
12.12.2013 V0.2 about the issuance of this policy and Amit Ray
Sharma
also to give advance intimation to the
assured departments to get prepared.
Ram K
30.12.2013 V1.0 First Release Amit Ray
Sharma
Removed exclusion of international
19.03.2019 V1.1 Rajesh Maji Rajiv Swarup
students
01.04.2019 V1.2 Revision of rates Rajesh Maji Rajiv Swarup
Inclusion of non-assistantship bearing Col. Gopal
16.08.2019 V1.3 Rajesh Maji
PGs Karunakaran
Change in Budget procedure for OCJ
Gopal
25.04.2020 V1.4 and provision for students to work G Jaishankar
Karunakaran
away from Campus
25.05.2020 V1.5 Some clarifications on OCJ related
Gopal
expenses and privileges. G Jaishankar
Karunakaran
POLICY ASSURED BY:
Department: Represented By: Date
Finance Manish Gaur 30.12.2013
Dean UG Studies &
Students’ Affairs (Policy Amit Ray 30.12.2013
Owner)
POLICY RATIFIED BY:
Office of: Represented By: Date
Registrar SNU Samuel Ernest 30.12.2013
Dean – UG Studies and Students’ Affairs Amit Ray 30.12.2013
Director School of Engineering Madan Gopal 30.12.2013
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
Director School of Humanities & Social Sciences Shubhashis Gangopadhyay 30.12.2013
Director School of Management and
Shekhar Chaudhuri 30.12.2013
Entrepreneurship
Director School of Natural Sciences Rupamanjari Ghosh 30.12.2013
President SNU Rajiv Swarup 30.12.2013
Vice Chancellor SNU Nikhil Sinha 30.12.2013
3
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
Table of Contents
HEADING PAGE
OBJECTIVE 5
SCOPE 5
GENERAL GUIDELINES 6
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILIES 7-8
RECRUITMENT AND HIRING PROCESS 9
ANNEXURE 1: LETTER OF INTENT 10
ANNEXURE 2: TERMS AND CONDITIONS 11
ANNEXURE 3: POSITION DESCRIPTION 13
ANNEXURE 4: APPLICATION FORM 14
ANNEXURE 5: FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS 16
4
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
Policy Details
1. OBJECTIVE
The objective of this policy is to provide opportunities to undergraduate students and students
from some masters’ degree program (without any Teaching Assistantship and for jobs specific
to post-graduate programs) to gain experiential and applied learning and help them inculcate
ethics, leadership and service attributes. These opportunities would also help students to earn
supplementary income for meeting their expenses and simultaneously helping them imbibe
the accountability and responsibility that comes along.
Possible jobs under this policy may include, but are not limited to, assisting in laboratory and
library management, monitoring projects, conducting and analysing various feedbacks,
managing help desks, aiding departments in enabling functions of the University like
Admissions, Career Development Centre, Deans Student Affairs Office, Security, Hostels,
Sports and allied activities etc.
2. SCOPE
This policy applies to resident undergraduate students and non-assistantship bearing Masters’
students (students from the Masters’ degree programs without any Teaching Assistantship)
for jobs specific to post-graduate programs, 18 years or above in age, pursuing a full time
course of study, having a CGPA of 6.0 or more and who are not on any kind of disciplinary
probation. Students who have not received their first CGPA would be eligible provided they
do not have any unclear ‘F’ grade. International students studying undergraduate or masters’
degree programs at SNU may also apply for any open position, subject to not violating their
visa restrictions, if there is any.
This policy excludes students from the Masters’ degree programs with Teaching Assistantship
as well as all doctoral students, exchange program students, certificate program students and
those undergraduate students who are receiving such financial assistance or aid, which
restricts them from assuming any other paid assignment.
There is a provision for students to work while they are away from the campus, during study
break or any other break when they are authorized by the University to work as OCJs.
Approval in this case, has to be obtained from the DSA.
Dean Students’ Affairs is the owner of the policy and any clarifications or exceptions should
be routed to Dean Students’ Affairs. This policy is effective immediately on release.
5
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
3. GENERAL GUIDELINES
3.1. WORK SCHEDULE: It can be for a maximum of 20 hours per week when the
academic session is in progress and for a maximum of 40 hours during vacations,
week runs from Sunday to Saturday. Work schedule while away from campus will be
decided by Employing Department, subject to a maximum of 20 hours a week.
3.2. STIPEND: The rate of remuneration will be ₹ 100 per hour when the academic session
is in progress. During vacation period the stipend would be a lump-sum payment of ₹
3,000 per week against a work schedule of 40 hours. The stipend will be
proportionately adjusted if the work schedule is less than 40 hours per week.
3.3. BENEFITS: The On Campus Part Time jobs provide students opportunities to enrich
their experience of holistic learning with some real life work. The work may or may not
be directly related to subjects they are currently studying, but in overall scheme of
things, it adds to their bio data and improves their employment potential.
3.4. TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
3.4.1. The appointment is temporary (ad-hoc) and casual in nature;
3.4.2. Working hours are irregular;
3.4.3. Work is secondary to the student's academic and student life;
3.4.4. Work schedules will be kept flexible enough to support the academic program
of the student;
3.4.5. Students should be supervised directly at all times by concerned member
from employing department;
3.4.6. University Holidays will be applicable;
3.4.7. All appropriate University polices will be applicable, for e.g. Gender policy,
Occupational Health and Safety Policy, Privacy policy of employing department
etc.;
3.4.8. Students may not ordinarily apply for leave, but employing department may
make adjustments in schedule to accommodate personal exigencies;
3.4.9. Students should provide one-week notice when they want to voluntarily
withdraw from a job assignment. Also, employing department needs to give one
week notice for releasing students prior to scheduled end of assignments;
3.4.10. Stipends are tax exempted.
3.4.11. All Payments to the Students and Expenses incurred on the OCJ including
food, accommodation and other facilities will be billed to the employing
department. Details of allotment and expenditure will be held at the Office of the
6
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
DSA. Admissions and CDC will continue to budget and maintain their own OCJ
employment plans as hitherto fore. Bills should be accordingly raised by
concerned Departments. In this connection, please also refer Para 4.6 of "Policy
# ST205 Hostel Room Charges and Entitlement Policy" .It is highlighted that as
given in this policy, Students on Summer Semester, employed as OCJs will have
to pay for their own accommodation.
3.4.12. Admission OCJs during admission process in summer breaks will be
provided special privileges like AC rooms (subject to availability), food
coupons, and more internet bandwidth extra cost for these benefits will be billed
to the employing department.
4. ROLES AND RESPONSBILITES
4.1. Dean Students’ Affairs (DSA)
4.1.1. Administer the policy and ensure compliance with relevant guidelines.
4.1.2. Obtain OCJ employment plan for the forthcoming year from all Departments
along with Budget requests.
4.1.3. Collate these requests and obtain approval of VC, through Finance
Department.
4.1.4. After approval of the VC, allot budget to the every employing department and
keeping track of expenditure on monthly basis. Admissions and CDC will however
maintain their own budgetary control
4.1.5. Inform students on job postings and recruitment process;
4.1.6. Provide training and counselling to students related to on campus part time
jobs;
4.1.7. Documentation and records management.
4.2. Employing Department
4.2.1. Every Employing Department has to forward their respective requirements for
OCJ before the end of previous financial year to the DSA office with specific
number of OCJ required for the coming academic year. In case of ad-hoc
requirement, the department has to seek special approval from DSA. Approval
for those will be granted, subject to availability of funds on case-by-case basis.
4.2.2. Follow appropriate guidelines and approval procedure for creating a part time
job for students. All part time on campus jobs employing students have to be
approved by Director of School or Head of Enabling Function;
7
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
4.2.3. Create a pertinent job description and specification, jobs should be designed
outside the examination week preferably;
4.2.4. Follow fair and equitable recruitment and hiring process;
4.2.5. Approve the timesheets submitted by the students within deadline so that
Finance department can payment on fortnightly basis;
4.2.6. Ensure compliance against applicable University policies;
4.2.7. Establish clear goals and expectations with the Student at the beginning of
assignment;
4.2.8. Provide students with the tools necessary for performing the work assigned;
4.2.9. Set a positive example of professional, polite and ethical behavior;
4.2.10. Show appreciation and ask for student's input;
4.2.11. Remember that they are students first;
4.2.12. Employing department may terminate an assignment after giving appropriate
reasoning to DSA’s office for poor work performance or attendance; willful
violation of University rules and policies; budget constraints; lack of work;
and/or improper conduct;
4.3. Finance
4.3.1. Validate approved timesheets by the employing department in OCJ
application;
4.3.2. Release payments to students on fortnightly basis within 7 days of receipt of
timesheets;
4.3.3. Taxation compliance in book of accounts;
4.4. Students
4.4.1. Follow email communication for any new job posting;
4.4.2. During on-going assignment, they can’t apply against any other job posting;
4.4.3. Students are expected to report to work on time;
4.4.4. Maintain a well-groomed appearance while reporting to work;
4.4.5. Try to establish a good working relationship with their supervisors and other
members in the employing department;
4.4.6. Follow University and employing department's policies and procedures.
4.4.7. Do not hesitate to ask questions and seek clarifications;
4.4.8. Students may get access to confidential information while doing these jobs,
the same should not be shared by them with anyone else;
4.4.9. Update timesheet in OCJ application on daily basis and submit the same to
the employing department for approval within deadline.
8
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
5. RECRUITMENT AND HIRING PROCESS
5.1. Outlining Job Description and Specification
This will be provided by the Employing Department to the DSA’s office with necessary
aspects mentioned like job being offered, job duties, working hours/schedule,
information about supervisor, desirable qualification (specialization) and behavioral
competencies etc.
5.2. Listing the Job Opening
DSA’s office will send email communication to all the UG and applicable PG students
informing the new job posting and will invite applications; each posting will have a
final date for submitting applications. The Dean Students’ Affairs will screen the
applications received for eligibility criteria or his representative and the screened
applications will be forwarded to the employing department.
5.3. Interview Process
Employing department will shortlist applications and call students for interviews
through DSA’s office. Interviews will be conducted in a professional manner and as
far as possible by a panel; applicants will be evaluated objectively against job
requirement criteria of Employing Department.
5.4. Selection
The Employing Department will communicate the selection of the students to DSA.
Further, DSA will communicate the result to the selected students.
5.5. Onboarding
On the first day, employing department will explain the job duties, provide necessary
tools for performing the job to the student and explain the process of updating
timesheet on OCJ Application.
9
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
Annexure 1
LETTER OF INTENT
<Date>
<Name of the Student>
Student ID: <Student Id>
<Program> in <Major> - <Batch>
Dear <Student First Name>,
This is with reference to your application and subsequent interview with us, we are pleased to
offer you an On Campus Job as <Designation> with <Depatment> at the Shiv Nadar
University (SNU) starting from <Start Date> to <End Date>.
Your immediate supervisor will be <Supervisor’s Name> at the <Department Name>. When
the academic session is in progress, you will be required to work for up to a maximum of 20
hours every week as per the schedule defined by the supervisor and you will be paid a stipend
of ₹.100/- per hour. During vacations, you will be required to work for up to a maximum of 40
hours every week as per the schedule defined by the supervisor and you will be paid a stipend
of up to a maximum of ₹.3000/- per week.
You will be required to mark regular attendance with your supervisor and fill in timesheet in
OCJ application. You will need to submit your timesheet for approval within stipulated
deadline, failing which; your payment may be impacted. You will need to take prior written
permission from your supervisor for any travel outside SNU campus for work related to your
On Campus Job.
You will be required to handover all the data, confidential information and any other
information collected during your On Campus Job to your supervisor and seek clearance at
the end of your assignment. You are required to sign the undertaking with respect to
confidentiality and terms of On Campus Jobs as per the attached annexure.
I am confident that this will prove to be a fruitful learning experience for you.
10
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
Annexure 2
TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR ON CAMPUS JOBS (OCJ):
1. At - Will Assignment
OCJ’s are temporary and casual in nature and is secondary to a student’s academic responsibilities and shall not
involve any academic credit benefit. OCJ’s may be terminated at any time by either SNU or the student by giving
one week notice. The student selected for any OCJ is accepting the offer at her free will. This assignment may be
terminated by Dean of Students’ Affairs on immediate notice in case a student defaults on any University mandated
academic and / or financial obligations.
2. Work Place Expectations and Conduct
Working Hours for OCJ’s will be defined by the employing department & shall be informed to the student in the
form of a weekly schedule. Students should ordinarily report at the place of work at least 15 minutes before the
scheduled time and should be present for the full duration specified in the schedule. Students must complete the
duties as assigned by the supervisor and should not do any personal work while on duty. Students are expected
to be cordial in their behavior at work, be respectful and considerate to co-workers and supervisor(s) and should
not use abusive language or slangs. Any violation may lead to immediate termination superseding the notice period
clause.
3. Dress Code & Personal Protective Equipment (PPE)
Students must maintain a well-groomed appearance while reporting for their OCJ assignment. They are expected
to wear smart casuals and keep a clean appearance. Sweatshirts, athletic wear, baggy or ripped jeans, slippers or
flip flops, T-shirts with offensive imprints, rolled up cuffs, faded clothing or anything that is too short, tight-fitting,
sheer are not permitted. Specifically for boys tucked out shirts, open toed shoes and for girl is, flashy accessories
are not allowed.
For specific jobs, the employing department may provide PPE i.e. helmets, goggles, gloves, protective clothing or
shoes to be worn while undertaking certain assignments, students must wear this safety gear at all times as
instructed by the supervisor.
4. Timesheets
Payments will be released on submission of Timesheet. It is the responsibility of the student to get their supervisor’s
approval on weekly basis and thereafter submit the timesheet by every Tuesday (for the preceding week) to
President’s Office. Any time sheet not received by end of day Tuesday will lead to losing of remuneration for the
previous week.
Students shall not be eligible for leaves under ordinary circumstances; however, the supervisor might permit their
absence on medical grounds or some emergent situation.
5. Confidentiality
Students should not remove files or other materials from their workplace and follow employing department’s rules
regarding use of equipment, supplies, phones, computers or any other tool provided for the assignment. Also, in
the course of their assignment students may have access to documents or information, which is confidential,
11
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
Sensitive or protected by privacy laws. Students shall not disclose such information to anyone inside or outside of
the University. In case of any doubt, students are expected to reach out to their immediate supervisor on how to
handle such information.
6. Damage to SNU Property
Students are expected to ensure proper upkeep of all facilities and resources they use and ensure their behavior
does not compromise safety of other users at any time. Students will be held accountable for any accidental or
intentional damage to facilities, as deemed appropriate by Dean Student’s Affairs Office.
I have read and understood the above terms and conditions of my OCJ assignment and agree to abide by them.
Student Signature: Name:
Student ID No: Date:
12
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
Annexure 3
POSITION DESCRIPTION FOR PART TIME JOB FOR UG & NON-ASSISTANTSHIP
BEARING MASTERS STUDENTS
Position Title:
Position Reports To:
Position Type (Academic/Non Academic)
No of Positions:
Department:
Hours to be worked weekly:
Days and time slot to be worked daily:
Budgeted or Non-Budgeted
Start Date: End Date:
Work Location:
Last date for receiving applications:
Position Summary:
Job Responsibilities:
Knowledge / Skills to be required
Contact Person
Email Address
Extension
13
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
Annexure 4
OCJ: STUDENT APPLICATION
FORM
Position Applied for
PERSONAL DETAILS:
Student Full Name Student Roll No
Nick Name (How you
Program
like to be addressed)
Admission Year Major
Hostel and Room No CGPA
Mobile # SNU Email ID
Courses that you have Registered for in Current Semester Summer:
Course Code Course Name Credits Repeating or New Course
Interest and Hobbies:
14
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
Why do you want to apply for this job?
Any relevant experience in the past, (class project or any other voluntary or paid work) ?
Details of Past OCJ assignments if any (Please give references of your OCJ supervisors):
How have past OCJ’s helped you in your CV:
Please mention your availability (Free Slots) during 9:00 AM to 7:30 PM, Monday to Sunday:
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Sunday
Signature: Date:
15
On Campus Part Time Jobs ST203 V1.5
Annexure 5: FREQENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Q. How will I know when jobs are available?
Ans: Dean Students’ Affairs Office will coordinate all job postings and they will have information on all
open job postings. This information will be sent to all the UG and applicable PG students via email
communication
Q. How do I apply for a position?
Ans: When a job is posted via email communication, each job posting will have details on the respective
application process to be followed.
Q. Will the jobs be linked to my course?
Ans: Jobs will be of various kinds depending on University work, it may not necessarily be specific to
your course.
Q. Can I stay in the hostel while doing a part time job during vacations?
Ans. Yes and there will be no additional cost.
Q. How and when will I get paid?
Ans: Your payments will be done by preferably online bank transfer, released by the Finance
department on fortnightly basis or at end of assignment.
Q: I have joined, but I don’t want to continue?
Ans: You can inform employing department 1 week in advance to give notice for leaving the part time
job.
16