The Constitution of the Student Council, Shiv Nadar University, Delhi – NCR was:
First Adopted and Enacted in the year 2013.
Last amended on the 22nd day of March 2025,
Following approval and ratification by the Senate of 2024 on the 11th day of March 2025.
The Constitution received the Vice-Chancellor’s assent on the 22nd day of March 2025.
Dr. Ananya Mukherjee
The Vice-Chancellor, Shiv Nadar University, Delhi NCR
PREAMBLE
We, the Students of Shiv Nadar University, recognise the uniqueness of this institution
and our responsibility to undertake a critical role in its ongoing venture. To achieve
quality education and educate ourselves to suit the demands of our evolving university,
we endeavour to effectively and efficiently use the resources available to communicate
student opinions clearly and wilfully to the faculty, administrators and the Board.
Through this, we aim to achieve consensus within the University community on the
formulation and execution of the policy. We recognise the vision and mission of this
institution and realise our role in its execution. We resolve to sustain and nurture the
spirit of Shiv Nadar University by entrusting its care to all its stakeholders to empower
and encourage the leaders of tomorrow. Therefore, we do hereby ordain and establish
the Constitution of the Student Council of Shiv Nadar University and constitute the
Shiv Nadar University Student Council.
Article I – Identity and Purpose
Section 1. Name.
This body shall be known as “Shiv Nadar University Student Council” and shall be referred to as the
Council from now on.
Section 2. Objective.
The Council shall pursue the objectives stated in the preamble. Any matter directly affecting the
students shall fall within the Council’s jurisdiction.
Section 3. Patron of the Council.
The Vice-Chancellor shall be the Patron of the Council. The VC:
1. Shall possess the power to dissolve the Student Council wholly or in part.
2. Shall possess the power to overturn any decision taken by any branch of the Council in
violation of pre-existing rules, regulations, policies, contracts of the University or the law of
the land.
3. Shall address the Council, in person or in writing, by calling for a joint session at the beginning
of each academic year.
4. May attend any committee proceedings, Senate sessions or any meeting of the student leaders.
5. May advise the Senate on the University’s activities for the forthcoming academic year.
Section 4. Non-Discrimination Clause.
This Constitution prohibits discrimination based on ancestry, citizenship, creed, economic background
or status, ethnic identity, gender, national origin, physical disability, political affiliation or ideology,
race, religion or sexual orientation.
Section 5. Composition of the Student Council.
The Student Council shall comprise of the following:
1. The Senate (details thereof specified in Article II)
2. The Executive Cabinet (details thereof specified in Article III)
Article II – The Senate
Section 1. Identity.
The Senate of the Student Council (from now on referred to as the Senate) shall be a unicameral
body of senators elected every year by all students at the university.
Section 2. Membership and Eligibility.
1. Each group of not more than 50 students shall elect one representative to the senate, who will be
referred to as a Senator from now on.
2. A senator shall be treated as the equivalent of a class representative.
3. Such a person, to be elected, should:
- Have a minimum CGPA of 6.50.
- Have no academic arrears.
- Have no record of disciplinary action against them in the due course of their stay.
Section 3. The Speaker of the Senate.
The presiding officer of the Senate shall be the Vice President of the Cabinet (from now on referred
to as the Speaker of the Senate). The Speaker:
1. Shall possess the power to nominate senators to various committees of the Student Council.
2. Shall assign committee membership based on the Senators' best interest and the Council's
requirements.
3. Can call for a vote on a resolution in the Senate. Such votes shall require a two-thirds majority
of the house to pass.
4. Shall pass accepted resolutions for the President’s assent within seven days.
Section 4. The President shall possess the authority to either provide their assent or veto the
resolution within two weeks after the Speaker presents it. If they fail to decide, the motion shall be
deemed passed.
Section 5. Tenure.
Each senator's term shall last no more than one academic year (or twelve months). Should a senator
vacate their office, by resignation or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by a special poll called by
the Patron of the Student Council or the Election Officer.
Section 6. Senate Committees.
1. The Senate shall be divided into committees.
2. All senators shall be allotted only one committee by the Speaker of the Senate and the Secretary
of the Senate.
3. A simple majority shall take all decisions within a committee. A complete voting procedure in
the Senate shall then follow.
4. The following committees shall exist, with no order of precedence whatsoever:
- Finance Committee
- Academic Affairs Committee
- Campus Affairs Committee
- Cultural Committee
- Technical Committee
- Sports Committee
- Press Committee
- IT Committee
- Food Affairs Committee
The committees' composition and responsibilities shall be as specified in Annexures A through J.
Section 7. The Senate shall:
1. Hold all powers to legislate or repeal any resolution to maintain a healthy academic, mental, and
cultural atmosphere within the University.
2. Hold the power to reverse the President’s veto by a two-thirds majority.
3. Meet at least thrice in a semester.
4. By a majority, suspend a senator, and further by a two-thirds majority, expel a senator for
disorderly behaviour during the Senate proceedings.
5. Reserve the power to impeach any sitting member of the Student Council from office for
violating the Constitution, University Policy, Statutory Regulations, the law of the land or the
Human Rights of a fellow individual on or off campus that could discredit the reputation of the
Student Council and/or of the University. The motion may be passed by a two-thirds majority in
the Senate.
6. When necessary, make recommendations to formulate or amend any University policy by passing
a non-binding ‘Sense of the Senate’ Resolution.
7. Adopt its own set of internal rules of proceedings about its functioning for the rest of its tenure
at the beginning of the first session. This protocol shall be exclusive to the Senate of the particular
year.
8. Open all Senate Sessions for observance by the public. Observers shall not only be allowed to
participate in discussions during the Question Hour. Their respective senators should raise any
issue. If they still wish to speak, prior permission of the Speaker with a detailed agenda of what
they wish to say should be obtained to participate in said discussions. If the speaker does deny a
request, a detailed explanation as to the reasons for this should be provided to the concerned
observer.
9. Hold Question Hour, a specific timeslot at the beginning of each senate session where senators
and observers can question the Executive Cabinet and Office Bearers on progress of work.
Section 8. Compensation.
The Senate shall authorise no pay or compensation for any member of the Student Council.
Section 9. Absenteeism
All Senators are required to adhere to the uniform policy and are permitted to be absent from at max
four senate sessions and relevant townhalls. The criteria may be relaxed by the Vice President if prior
intimation is given with valid reason. Following this, a vote to call for their impeachment on the
grounds of failure to enact the duties prescribed by the Constitution can be put in motion, requiring a
simple majority to pass.
Article III – The Executive Cabinet
Section 1. Name.
This body shall be known as the Executive Cabinet of the Student Council and shall be referred to as
The EC (or) The Cabinet (or) The Executive Cabinet.
Section 2. Identity and composition.
The Executive Cabinet shall comprise of the following:
1. The President of the Council.
2. The Vice President of the Council.
3. Thirteen secretaries of various portfolios (eligibilities, roles, and responsibilities part thereof will
be as specified in Annexures A through I).
Section 3. Tenure. The tenure of the President, the Vice President, and the Cabinet shall not exceed
12 months.
Section 4. The Office-Bearers.
1. Identity. The Office-Bearers shall comprise The President of the Council, The Vice President
of the Council, the Secretary of Sports and the Secretary of Culture.
2. Eligibility. Any student who:
i. Is eligible to be a member of the Senate (details thereof specified in Article II) (and)
ii. Has completed one year at the university (and)
iii. Has not run for office at any earlier point in time during their stay in the university shall
be eligible.
3. The Office-Bearers shall:
i. Be the public face and represent the student fraternity on and off campus.
ii. Call for a university-wide town hall at least once throughout their tenure.
4. Description:
i. The President: The President of the Council shall act as the presiding officer of the
Cabinet. The executive power of the Council shall be vested in them.
ii. The Vice President: The Speaker of the Senate shall act as the presiding officer of the
Senate, with the executive power of the Senate vested in them.
iii. The Secretary of Sports: The Secretary of Sports is the POC between the student body
and the Department of Physical Education. They are responsible for handling all
sporting activities, events & external tournaments; and the welfare and upkeep of the
condition of all sporting facilities and its involved stakeholders.
iv. The Secretary of Culture: The Secretary of Culture is responsible for overseeing all
clubs & societies along with event approval and budgets, organizing events for the
university body, facilitating external participation, and advising the core teams of clubs
and festivals by leading the relevant portfolios in the cabinet. They will also act as the
UAC (University Activities Centre) overseer and assign UAC coordinators chosen from
the cultural committee, senate or DSA office in that term. The Cultural Secretary and
the UAC coordinators will ensure management goes smoothly throughout the tenure
and is in line with the UAC Guidelines.
5. Appointment: The Office-Bearers shall be elected directly through a secret ballot by the entire
university following a debate conducted by the previous Secretary of Senate and representatives
from the student-run press and media outlets, which shall be held after nominations are filed
with the Patron.
Section 5. Executive Cabinet Appointment.
1. The appointment of the Executive Cabinet shall follow the election of the Office-Bearers. Any
student eligible to be a Senate member with relevant experience shall be eligible to apply. Secretaries
of Food Affairs and Senate have additional eligibility requirements mentioned in their respective
sections.
2. The appointment of each position shall include a nomination procedure, followed by an interview by
the newly elected Office-Bearers with the preceding Office Bearers and preceding Secretary of the
position. The preceding Office-Bearers will be in an advisory position. This shall be followed by a
Senate session led by the newly elected office bearers, during which each short-listed contestant will
formally address the Senate, and a debate amongst the candidates will be held. A simple majority
anonymous voting process by the Senate shall then elect the Executive Cabinet.
3. Counting of votes shall happen in the presence of the newly elected and previous Office Bearers.
There must be a declaration sheet which reports the vote count from each counter. The results must
be announced within 48 hours from the day the elections end along with the declaration sheet.
4. In the case of the unavailability of preceding Office Bearers, for example in cases of re-election due
to vacancy, they shall not be required in the appointment procedure.
Section 6. Role of the Cabinet.
The members of the Cabinet shall:
1. Act as Executive Head of the Senate Committees
2. Consider all input provided by students and present to their respective committees issues that
may come under their portfolio.
3. Seek from the President any executive decisions that may be taken to solve said issues.
Section 7. Role of the President.
The President shall:
1. With the Cabinet, establish a calendar for the agendas for the year.
2. Give the final affirmation for any cultural event or competition to be held by any student body.
3. Reserve the right to examine expenditures incurred by any club/society.
4. Inform the Vice President about such measures as they shall judge necessary and expedient for
consideration in the Senate.
5. Call a meeting of the Cabinet at least three times a semester.
Section 8. The Secretary of Senate.
▪ There shall be a Secretary of Senate as part of the Cabinet.
▪ Eligibility. Any student with relevant senate experience and a CGPA above 6.50 shall be eligible.
▪ Role. The role of the Secretary will be as follows:
i. Maintain all the records pertaining to all Senate and Cabinet meetings and pass them
forward to the Secretary of Press.
ii. Assist the Speaker through Senate proceedings and archive all communications,
resolutions, reports, and other official paperwork.
iii. Act as executive head of all Committees along with the respective member of the Cabinet.
Section 9. The Secretary of Food Affairs.
▪ There shall be a Secretary of Food Affairs as part of the Cabinet, who will be elected in
accordance with Article III Section 5. Additionally,
▪ The eligibility criteria will be
Any student with relevant food affairs experience and a CGPA above 6.50 shall be
eligible to stand for the Secretary of Food Affairs position.
▪ For the role and functions of the secretary and the Food Affairs Committee, refer to
Annexure J below.
Section 10. Membership in the Senate
▪ The Executive Cabinet shall be present in the Senate sessions to represent the interests of their
portfolio and their committees. They shall share reports of the progress of their work and keep
documentation to present, on demand of the Senate.
▪ Members of the Executive Cabinet are required to adhere to the uniform policy and are
permitted to be absent from three sessions of the Senate. Following this, a vote to call for
their impeachment on the grounds of failure to enact the duties prescribed by the Constitution
can be put in motion, requiring a two-thirds majority to pass.
Article IV – Continuity of Council and Amendments
Section 1. Amendment.
Any Senate or Cabinet member shall be eligible to propose an Amendment to the Constitution. The
adopted procedure shall be as follows:
1. The amendment shall be introduced as a Resolution to Amend in accordance with Annexure J of
the Constitution.
2. The resolution shall have to be passed by a two-thirds majority in the Senate.
3. Such passed amendments shall not require the approval of the President.
Section 2. Order of Precedence.
1. The President shall be the highest-ranking member of the Student Council.
2. The order of the precedence in the decreasing order is as follows:
a. The Office-Bearers
b. The Executive Cabinet
c. Chairpersons of Committees
d. Senators
Section 3. Continuity of Council.
1. The President shall be responsible for preserving, protecting, and defending the Constitution of
the Student Council.
2. The Office of the President, at all times, shall be occupied to ensure the continuity of the Council.
In case of the removal of the President from office or of their resignation, the Vice President
shall assume their position.
3. In case of a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall nominate an interim
Vice President among the existing members of the Cabinet, who shall take office upon
confirmation by a simple majority vote in the Senate.
4. Whenever the President is facing any disciplinary inquiry or charges from the University
administration, they shall transmit their written declaration that they are unable to discharge the
powers and duties of the office to the Patron. If the administration declares them cleared of all
charges, they shall transmit to the Patron a written declaration to the contrary. Until then, the
Vice President shall discharge such powers and duties as Acting President.
Annexure A – The Finance Committee
Section 1. Responsibility and Scope. This Committee shall be responsible to:
1. Act as the principal financial body of the Council.
2. Prepare and present annual budgets for activities carried out by all student bodies, including
but not limited to cultural societies, clubs and the Council.
Section 2. Structure. The Committee shall consist of:
1. Two Secretaries of Treasury with no order of precedence whatsoever, who shall be appointed
in accordance with Article III Section 5. They shall:
i. Maintain a ledger of all the transactions made during their tenure.
ii. Present the semester financial report to the Committee, which shall be reviewed and
forwarded to the Patron of the Council at the end of the year.
iii. Reserve the right to enter/remove entries from the ledger while the standing committee
members shall be granted viewing rights to the ledger.
2. The Senate Committee: Members from the Senate appointed in accordance with Article II
Section 6. They shall:
i. Reserve a right to conduct a comprehensive financial review ten days prior to any
scheduled event and another within two months following the conclusion of the event
overseen by the Secretary of Culture.
ii. Keep account of monetary transactions and financial documents for all
events/undertakings under the Council, Cabinet, and related bodies.
iii. Act as an advisory and regulatory body for all financial matters of the cultural clubs.
iv. Meet the cultural club treasurers regularly and submit a semi-annual report of all club
expenditures to the Senate.
v. Present the ledger to those interested in evaluating the expenses only on special request
and subsequent approval by the Secretary of Treasury.
vi. Be granted viewing rights to the Ledger.
Annexure B – The Academic Affairs Committee
Section 1. Responsibility and Scope. This committee shall be responsible to:
1. Bridge the gap between the student community and the Dean of Academics, Dean of
Research and Partnership, and Deans of Schools.
2. Put forth student grievances related to academics to the concerned authorities.
3. Operate a chain of suggestions and feedback between all stakeholders involved – students,
faculty and the administration- for all academic aspects.
4. Streamlining the Academic journey for all students by implementing initiatives that enhance
their overall experience
5. Ensure that all the faculty adhere to the faculty policy, and if observed otherwise, bring it to
the concerned authorities.
6. Ensure that at least one townhall related to academics happens every semester.
Section 2. Structure. The committee shall consist of the following:
1. Two Secretaries of Academic Affairs – one representing the School of Engineering and one
representing the other Schools of the university – with no order of precedence whatsoever,
appointed in accordance with Article III Section 5. They shall:
i. Maintain all records and suggestions received under their domain.
ii. Make themselves involved in the scheduling of mid-semester and end-semester
examinations.
iii. Represent the Student Council in the Timetable and Library Committees of the
University.
2. The Senate Committee: Members from the Senate appointed in accordance with Article II
Section 6. They shall:
i. Be responsible for aiding the Secretaries in collecting grievances of the student
community under their domain and beyond, organising academic-related events and
coming up with new initiatives.
ii. It should have at least one senator from each school at SNIoE, and the overall
committee must try to accommodate at least one student from each major.
iii. Ensure that Class Representatives meet respective HoDs at least twice every semester
before every meeting of the Academic Council.
Section 3. The Committee shall meet at least once every month. It shall be mandatory for all
members to attend the meeting. Absenteeism shall be excused only if a prior note is addressed to
the Secretaries of Academic Affairs.
Annexure C – The Sports Committee
Section 1. Responsibility and Scope. The Committee of Sports Affairs (hereafter, the Committee)
shall be responsible to:
1. Coordinate between the students and the University in organising sporting events.
2. Ensure the condition of sports and fitness facilities is maintained periodically.
Section 2. Structure.
1. The committee shall consist of the following:
i. One Secretary of Sports (Secretary, hereafter) who shall be appointed in accordance
with Article III Section 5.
ii. Core comprised of Deputy Sports Secretary, Internal Affairs Secretary, and External
Affairs Secretary.
iii. Extended Core comprised of Design Lead, Content Lead, Marketing Lead, and
Photography/Videography Lead.
iv. Sport Representatives comprised of team captains and other members as defined below.
v. Volunteers divided into the following teams: Design Team, Content Team, Marketing
Team, Photography/Videography Team, and Sports Management Team.
2. The Core Committee:
i. Membership and Role. The Core Committee shall comprise the following persons:
a) The Deputy Secretary of Sports shall assist the Secretary and act as the head of the
Committee in their absence. The Sports Representatives will also report to the
Deputy Sports Secretary.
b) The Internal Affairs Secretary shall be responsible for all sports/sports-related
events, its logistics and operations within the University.
c) The External Affairs Secretary shall be responsible for being the first point of
contact for all bodies external to the Sports Committee, i.e., cultural clubs, sport
clubs, external universities. They shall also be responsible for conducting
sports/sports-related events outside the University and organising friendly
tournaments with other Universities.
ii. Eligibility and Appointment.
a) Any student who has completed one semester at the university shall be eligible for
not more than one post, upon self nomination for the post, and the approval of the
Secretary.
b) The student must have represented the university in any sport within the last year.
c) A simple majority vote in the Committee by the Sport Representatives shall make
an appointment. In case of any tie, the Secretary shall possess the casting vote.
d) In case a member should fall out of favour, they shall be impeached upon the receipt
of a simple majority of the Committee in a referendum initiated by the Secretary.
iii. Shall meet at least once every fortnight.
iv. The terms for removal of members from the Committee shall be decided at the
beginning of their term by a simple majority. In case of any tie, the Secretary shall
possess the casting vote.
3. Extended Core Committee:
i. Membership and Role. The Extended Core Committee shall comprise the following
persons:
a) The Content Lead shall be responsible for all email correspondence and match
reports circulated by the Committee.
b) The Design Lead shall be responsible for all creatives, social media platforms,
and committee website content.
c) The Marketing Lead shall be responsible for handling the social media page of
the committee and the public relations of the committee.
d) The Photography/Videography Lead shall be responsible for capturing all forms
of photography and videography footage of all sporting events on campus, for
creative presentation and documentation purposes.
ii. Eligibility and Appointment.
a) Any student who has completed one semester at the university shall be eligible
for not more than one post, upon self-nomination for the post, and the approval
of the Secretary.
b) The Sports Secretary must conduct interviews and fairly evaluate and select
suitable members for the Extended Core Committee with the guidance of the
Core.
c) The Sports Secretary may elect 1 or 2 leads for all positions, at will.
iii. Shall meet at least once every fortnight.
iv. The terms for removal of members from the Extended Core Committee shall be at the
discretion of the Sports Secretary.
4. Sport Representatives:
i. Membership and Appointment: The Sports Representatives shall consist of one
representative appointed by the Secretary in consultation with sports officers and
coaches and team captain from all active sport teams.
ii. Each playing team shall be responsible for their sport and shall report to the
Secretary/Deputy Sports Secretary.
Section 3. Student Festivals. For all intra-university and inter-university festivals, the
Committee and the Organizing Committee of the festival shall handle all finance, logistics and
organisation. All regulations set by the bodies shall be binding on all clubs, chapters, and
societies.
Section 4. Sports Clubs.
1. Every relevant club must be registered under the Committee of Sports Affairs and shall
function like cultural clubs and societies.
2. The Secretary and the Department of Physical Education must approve all events conducted
by such clubs.
Annexure D – The IT Committee
Section 1. Responsibility and Scope. This committee shall be responsible to:
1. Provide IT and related support to students.
2. Maintain a constant communication channel for all clubs and societies through the backend
Content Management System (CMS).
3. Update the University website and application with relevant student-centric information.
4. Assist with support in the functioning of all student council-related, including but not limited
to Cultural & Technical Committee, websites.
5. Facilitate and promote student-led IT initiatives.
Section 2. Structure. The committee shall consist of the following:
1. One Secretary of Information Technology shall be appointed in accordance with Article III
Section 5. They shall be the sole point of contact for the Committee and ensure its efficient
functioning on a day-to-day basis.
2. The Senate Committee: Members from the Senate appointed in accordance with Article II
Section 6. They shall be responsible for aiding the Secretary in collecting grievances of the
student community under their domain and beyond. The Committee shall pursue the
objectives stated in Annexure C Section 1.
Section 3. The Committee shall meet at least once every month and shall be presided over by the
Secretary. It shall be mandatory for all members to attend the meeting. Absenteeism shall be
excused only if a prior note is addressed to the Secretary of IT.
Annexure E – The Press Committee
Section 1. Responsibility and Scope. This committee shall be responsible to:
1. Collect and maintain documentation of all the cultural, technical, sports or academic events
from respective Secretaries.
2. Convey said reports to the Media and Relations and Admissions Office of Shiv Nadar
University when required.
3. Establish and maintain university-wide general feedback/suggestions and redressal systems
for any issue on campus.
4. Release Monthly updates from the Council to the student body.
5. Ensure documentation (and publication) of scheduled admin and student body meetings.
6. Be a part of the election coverage Board.
7. Facilitate quick sharing of relevant information with anyone it may concern.
Section 2. Structure. The committee shall consist of the following:
1. One Secretary of Press, who shall be appointed in accordance with Article III Section 5.
They shall:
i. Maintain records and suggestions received and make them available to the student
body.
ii. Act as a bridge between the student body and the Council.
2. The Senate Committee: Members from the Senate appointed in accordance with Article II
Section 6. They shall be responsible for:
i. Aiding the Secretary in documentation, publication and running the Committee’s social
media accounts by facilitating the sharing of relevant information with anyone it may
concern.
ii. Collect grievances from the student community and ensure proper redressal.
3. External Members: External members and volunteers may be recruited into the Committee
at the discretion of the Secretary of Press.
Section 3. The Committee shall meet at least once every month. It shall be mandatory for all
members to attend the meeting. Absenteeism shall be excused only if a prior note is addressed to
the Secretary of Press.
Annexure F – The Campus Affairs Committee
Section 1. Responsibility and Scope. This committee shall be responsible to:
1. Bridge the gap between the student community and the Dean of Students with respect to
(w.r.t.) campus life.
2. Present grievances of students and maintain a chain of suggestions and feedback w.r.t.
hostels, maintenance, health and transport to concerned authorities.
Section 2. Structure. The committee shall consist of the following:
1. Two Secretaries of Campus Affairs – each from a different hostel type, i.e. gender-
segregated – with no order of precedence whatsoever who shall be appointed in accordance
with Article III Section 5. They shall:
i. Present and report the Committee proceedings to the Council.
ii. Be responsible for implementing suggestions and feedback from the Council and
student body.
iii. Ensure weekly meetings with Committee heads take place.
2. The Hostel Committee:
i. Hostel Heads. Senators allotted to the Hostel Committee shall be termed Hostel Heads.
They shall be responsible for addressing grievances w.r.t. hostels. They shall have
weekly meetings with hostel representatives and monthly meetings with hostel wardens
to discuss persisting issues and solutions. They shall report to the Secretary.
ii. The Committee shall consist of at least one student residing in each hostel block
selected via interviews conducted by the Hostel Heads and the Secretary. Vacancies
shall be filled by Hostel Heads or by a nominee named by the Secretary. A member
shall be expelled if they absent themselves from three successive meetings.
iii. Members shall meet wardens fortnightly to discuss issues regarding their hostels and
assist the Council of Wardens in maintaining living standards and room allotments.
They shall also report misuse or untoward events in hostel and guest rooms. In
coordination with maintenance, they shall ensure proper upkeep of hostel rooms,
common areas, toilets and premises. The Committee shall meet once a month, presided
over by the Secretary.
3. The Transport Committee:
i. Transport Heads. Senators allotted to the Transport Committee shall be termed
Transport Heads. They shall address and implement students' transportation
requirements and maintain a record of finances generated through weekly services.
They shall have weekly meetings with concerned authorities to ensure the smooth
functioning of shuttles. They shall also be responsible for introducing new facilities
based on demand.
ii. The Committee shall consist of a maximum of 10 students, out of which a minimum of
2 students are frequent users of campus shuttles. They shall be selected using a process
similar to the Hostel Committee's.
iii. The Committee shall report to the Head and the Secretary regarding the finances and
services provided by the transport contractors. The Committee shall meet once every
fortnight, presided over by the Secretary.
4. The Maintenance Committee:
i. Maintenance Heads. Senators allotted to the Maintenance Committee shall be termed
Maintenance Heads. They shall be responsible for addressing grievances w.r.t. facility
maintenance. They shall have weekly meetings with the Maintenance Committee and
monthly meetings with hostel wardens and the Maintenance Head of the university to
discuss persisting issues and solutions. They shall report to the Secretary.
ii. The Committee shall consist of a minimum of 4 students selected via interviews
conducted by the Maintenance Heads and the Secretary. Vacancies shall be filled by
Hostel Heads or by a nominee named by the Secretary. A member shall be expelled if
they absent themselves from three successive meetings.
iii. Members shall meet the administration fortnightly to discuss issues regarding the
maintenance of facilities and shall assist the administration in maintaining living
standards on campus. They shall also be responsible for monitoring the university's
health services. In coordination with the Hostel Committee, they shall ensure proper
upkeep of hostel rooms, common areas, toilets and premises. The Committee shall meet
once a month, presided over by the Secretary.
Annexure G – The Cultural Committee
Section 1. Responsibility and Scope. This committee shall be responsible to:
1. Organize all cultural events within the University.
2. Aid and advice the Secretary of Culture.
3. Aid and assist all Cultural Clubs and Societies.
4. Meet at least once per semester with all Club Secretaries, in the form of the Cultural
Committee Panel.
Section 2. Structure of the Committee.
1. Secretary of Culture, who shall be appointed in accordance with Article III Section 5
2. Cultural Committee Admin consisting of:
i. Two Chairpersons, who shall deputise for the Secretary of Culture in matters
concerning the Cultural Committee.
ii. Roles such as Cultural Coordinator(s) and/or Cultural Advisor(s) as need be.
3. External Affairs Secretary: One External Affairs Secretary to facilitate and coordinate
external opportunities for cultural clubs and the broader university community. Cultural
Committee Core who shall consist of positions such as Creative Director, Head of
Partnerships, etc. as need be.
i. One External Affairs Secretary as part of Cultural Committee Core to facilitate and
coordinate external opportunities for cultural clubs and the broader university
community.
4. Cultural Committee Leads who shall lead the various teams in the cultural committee.
5. Members from the Senate appointed in accordance with Article II Section 6. They shall be
termed Members.
6. Volunteers recruited for smooth conduct of events.
Section 3. Cultural Clubs and Societies.
1. Identity. Clubs, societies and chapters concerned with non-academic activities such as
music, dance, drama, debating and ideas (non-exhaustive) shall fall under the purview of
the Cultural Committee and shall be termed Cultural Societies.
2. All such clubs must be registered officially under the Cultural Committee and shall be
allocated a budget event-wise.
3. A Core Committee shall lead them. The structure and details thereof are as follows:
i. Secretary. The Secretary shall be the single point of contact and representative for the
society in the Cultural Committee. They shall act as the administrative head of the
society and chair all meetings. Any student in their second (and above) year of study
with a minimum CGPA of 6.5 shall be eligible.
ii. Two Associate Secretaries. They shall aid and assist the Secretary in conducting events,
general administration and smooth functioning of the club. Any student in their second
year (and above) of study shall be eligible.
iii. Treasurer. They shall keep a tab on the society's financial transactions and work in
conjunction with the Finance Committee of the Council. Any student in their second
year (and above) of study shall be eligible.
iv. Fresher Coordinator. They shall represent the fresher members of the society in the
Core Committee. They shall primarily be responsible for outreach of the society. Any
student in their first year of study shall be eligible.
v. Advisor. They shall act as a mentor and aid the Core Committee in the functioning of
the society. They shall not hold full administrative power as the rest of the Core.
Postgraduate or undergraduate students in their third year of study with previous
experience in the Core Committee shall be eligible.
4. Every club must have a secretary; a club cannot function with this position vacant. If a club
lacks a secretary, the Associate Secretary 1 will assume the role of interim secretary. If
Associate Secretary 1 is also not present, then Associate Secretary 2 will take on this role.
It is their responsibility to coordinate with their committee point of contact (POC) and
promptly organize re-elections to fill the secretary position. This shall happen according to
the announced timeline by the Cultural Secretary.
5. For any other vacant core positions, the secretary is responsible for coordinating re-
elections through the committee POC. In exceptional cases, the secretary may seek a
waiver from the Secretary of Culture and the Secretary of Technical Affairs (for
technical clubs).
6. Faculty Advisor. There shall be a faculty advisor for each club/society/chapter who shall
act as a mentor and aid the society in daily functioning and logistics. To add/change the
faculty advisor, a motion shall be presented to the Cultural Committee with appropriate
reasons and written confirmation from a faculty member willing to take the position. The
decision reached in a joint session between the Dean of Students, the Core Committee and
the Cultural Committee shall be binding.
7. Appointment and Removal of the Core Committee.
i. Other members of the society shall directly elect the Core Committee.
ii. Announcements, schedules, protocols, and conducts of said elections shall be at the
sole discretion of the Cultural Committee. The Cultural Committee and the Senate shall
oversee polling, while the outgoing core may be present as observers.
iii. Elections for all Cultural Societies shall be held simultaneously.
iv. If the club fails to successfully conduct their elections in the prescribed time period, at
the discretion of the Secretary of Culture it will be rendered a dormant club, and the
core shall be dissolved.
v. Additional posts in the Core Committee shall be added only after approval from the
Cultural Committee and the Dean of Students.
vi. Updated records of members with voting rights must be shared with the Cultural
Committee at the beginning of the academic year and after the end of each round of
recruitment. New members inducted during the same academic year as the elections
core committee’s tenure shall not possess nomination nor voting rights (for example,
members recruited in the academic year 2025-26 cannot vote or nominate for the core
of 2025-26).
vii. Violation of the Non-Discrimination Clause (Article I, Section 4) is strictly prohibited.
If observed, candidacy shall be void and disciplinary action shall be initiated.
viii. Impeachment. Any member of the society can file a motion of no-confidence by stating
the grounds and introducing proof. If the Cultural Committee deems the claim credible,
a referendum shall be initiated which shall be deemed passed upon receipt of a majority
of the members. Fresh elections shall be announced within one week, or an eligible
nomination from the rest of the Core shall be considered.
ix. Resignation. A formal letter of resignation shall be required to be sent to the Secretary
of Culture, the society and the faculty advisor. The Secretary of Culture reserves the
right to accept or reject the letter.
8. Events. All talks, workshops and competitions (non-exhaustive) recognised by the Cultural
Committee shall be considered events by the society.
i. Each club must conduct at least two events per academic year. If the club fails to
successfully meet this criteria, at the discretion of the Secretary of Culture it will be
rendered a dormant club, and the core shall be dissolved.
ii. All independent performing arts clubs must additionally conduct at least one Student
Mentorship Program per academic year.
iii. All events and schedules must be approved by the faculty advisor, the Cultural
Committee and the Dean of Students.
9. Finances and Budget.
i. Budgets required for events must be sent along with necessary details one week before
the event. Following approval by the faculty advisor and modifications by the Cultural
Committee, it shall be presented to the Dean of Students for approval.
ii. A record of all budgets sanctioned and expenditures incurred must be maintained along
with digital copies of bills and invoices. They must be shared with the Cultural
Committee and the Finance Committee within five days of the completion of an event.
iii. Chapters of external organisations shall receive approvals and sanctions from their
parent organisations. The aforementioned records must be detailed, and the Cultural
Committee reserves the right to inspect them at their discretion. Discrepancies shall
lead to suspension of the Core Committee until further notice.
Section 4. Student Festivals. For all intra-university and inter-university festivals, the Cultural
Committee and the festival's Organizing Committee shall handle all finance, logistics and
organisation. All regulations set by the bodies shall be binding on all clubs, chapters, and
societies who shall report to the Cultural Committee and the Organizing Committee.
Section 5. Representing the University in Inter-Collegiate Events.
1. The representatives of the Cultural Committee in the External Relations cell shall coordinate
with Cultural Societies for participation in external events and shall accompany university
contingents. They shall also function as the outreach wing of the Cultural Committee.
2. Students on academic or disciplinary probation will not be provided any funding whatsoever.
Illicit activities or breaches of decorum at events while representing the university shall lead
to strict action.
3. All participants must be selected by the society/club/chapter based on fair criteria overseen
by the Cultural Committee. Approval from the faculty advisor and the Cultural Committee
shall be required to participate and represent the university.
Section 6. Formation of a New Society.
1. Any proposed society must adhere to the core structure prescribed in this Annexure.
2. Formation shall require at least one faculty advisor. The Cultural Committee shall not be
responsible for the same.
3. Any proposal to form a new society must include the aim, mission, structure, rules and
protocols, which shall then be presented to a joint committee of the Dean of Students, the
Cultural Committee and the proposed faculty advisor. The decision reached in such a session
shall be binding.
Section 7. Club Championship. The Club Championship is a Cultural Committee initiative
designed to identify and celebrate clubs demonstrating exceptional achievement within their
designated areas, fostering a collaborative environment that encourages the holistic well-being of
club members.
The evaluation criteria are established after consulting the clubs and societies which are
participating in the program, and it is at the discretion of the Cultural Committee. It is subject to
modification to adapt to the evolving club landscape.
Section 8. Clubs & Societies Policy Document. The Cultural Secretary maintains a Clubs and
Societies Policy document to ensure easy access to norms, guidelines, and the latest policies
regarding student-led initiatives. Updates to the document can only be made by the Cultural
Secretary with the approval of the Dean of Students. In case of a conflict with any other
document or instruction, the Clubs and Societies Policy document will take precedence.
Annexure H – The Technical Committee
Section 1. Responsibility and Scope. The Technical Affairs Committee shall be responsible for:
1. Organising all technical events within the University.
2. Smooth functioning and elections of Technical Clubs/Societies/Chapters.
3. Maintain records and data from clubs regarding various events.
4. Help facilitate external participation from the clubs and student body.
Section 2. Structure of the Committee. The Committee shall consist of:
1. One Secretary of Technical Affairs shall be appointed in accordance with Article III
Section 5.
2. One Chairperson, who shall deputise for the Secretary of Technical Affairs in matters with
respect to the Technical Committee.
3. External Affairs Secretary: One External Affairs Secretary to facilitate and coordinate
external opportunities for technical clubs.
4. The Senate Committee: Members from the Senate appointed in accordance with Article II
Section 6. The committee shall aid and advise the Secretary of Technical Affairs to perform
their duty efficiently. The Committee shall pursue the objectives stated in Annexure I
Section 1.
5. External Volunteers: External members and volunteers may be recruited into the
Committee at the discretion of the Secretary of Technical Affairs and the Committee.
Section 3. Technical Societies/Clubs.
2. A Core Committee shall lead them. The structure and details thereof are as follows:
i. Secretary. The Secretary shall be the single point of contact and representative for the
society in the extended Technical Committee. They shall act as the administrative head
of the society and chair all meetings. Any student in their second (and above) year of
undergraduate study or postgraduates with a minimum CGPA of 6.5 shall be eligible.
ii. Associate Secretaries. They shall aid and assist the Secretary in conducting events,
general administration and smooth functioning of the club. They shall chair meetings
in the absence of the Secretary. Any student in their second (and above) year of
undergraduate study or postgraduates with a minimum CGPA of 6.5 shall be eligible.
iii. Treasurer. They shall keep a tab on the society's financial transactions and shall work
in conjunction with the Finance Committee of the Council. Any student in their second
year (and above) of study shall be eligible.
iv. Fresher Coordinator. They shall represent the fresher members of the society in the
Core Committee. They shall primarily be responsible for outreach of the society. Any
student in their first year of study shall be eligible.
v. Advisor. They shall act as a mentor and aid the Core Committee in the functioning of
the society. They shall not hold full administrative or voting power as the rest of the
Core. Postgraduate or undergraduate students with previous experience in the Core
Committee or sub-committees shall be eligible.
3. Every club must have a secretary; a club cannot function with this position vacant. If a club
lacks a secretary, the Associate Secretary 1 will assume the role of interim secretary. If
Associate Secretary 1 is also not present, then Associate Secretary 2 will take on this role.
It is their responsibility to coordinate with their committee point of contact (POC) and
promptly organize re-elections to fill the secretary position. This shall happen according to
the announced timeline by the Technical Affairs Secretary.
4. Clubs/Societies/Chapters may have internal teams or sub-committees to aid in functioning.
However, these positions shall not be recognised by the Technical Committee.
5. Faculty Advisor. There shall be a faculty advisor for each club/society/chapter who shall
act as a mentor and aid the society in daily functioning and logistics. To add/change the
faculty advisor, a motion shall be presented to the Technical Committee with appropriate
reasons and written confirmation from a faculty member willing to take the position. The
decision reached in a joint session between the Dean of Students, the Core Committee and
the Technical Committee shall be binding. A No Objection Certificate from the existing
faculty advisor shall be required to add a faculty advisor.
6. Membership.
i. Departmental Societies: All students enrolled for a major in any department with a
departmental society are, by default, members of the corresponding departmental
society.
ii. Chapters: The rules for the membership of any chapter will conform to the norms laid
down by the constitution of the parent organisation.
iii. Clubs: Clubs are free to choose their own membership criteria in consensus with the
Technical Affairs Committee.
iv. Departmental societies can choose to open their membership to students from other
academic backgrounds, subject to approval from their faculty advisors and prior
intimation to the Technical Committee.
v. Any changes to the membership policy of any club/society/chapter must be brought to
the notice of the Technical Committee before they come into effect.
7. Appointment and Removal of the Core Committee.
i. Other members of the society shall directly elect the Core Committee.
ii. Announcements, schedules, protocols, and conducts of said elections shall be at the
sole discretion of the Technical Committee, except for Chapters of external
organisations. The Technical Committee shall oversee polling, while a representative
of the outgoing core shall be present as an observer.
iii. Elections for all Technical Societies shall be held simultaneously.
iv. If the club fails to successfully conduct their elections in the prescribed time period, at
the discretion of the Secretary of Culture after consulting Secretary of Technical Affairs
it will be rendered a dormant club, and the core shall be dissolved.
v. Additional posts in the Core Committee shall be added only after approval from the
Technical Committee and the Dean of Students.
vi. Updated records of members with voting rights must be shared with the Technical
Committee at the beginning of the semester and after the end of each round of
recruitment. New members inducted during the same academic year as the elections
core committee’s tenure shall not possess nomination nor voting rights (for example,
members recruited in the academic year 2025-26 cannot vote or nominate for the core
of 2025-26).
vii. Violation of the Non-Discrimination Clause (Article I, Section 4) is strictly prohibited.
If observed, candidacy shall be deemed void and disciplinary action shall be initiated.
viii. The minimum academic requirements can be waived off in exceptional cases with the
permission of the Technical Affairs Committee in consultation with the Faculty
Advisor.
ix. Impeachment. A motion of no-confidence can be filed by any member of the society
by stating the grounds and introducing proof. If the Technical Committee deems the
claim credible, a referendum shall be initiated which shall be deemed passed upon
receipt of a majority of the members. Fresh elections shall be announced within one
week, or an eligible nomination from the rest of the Core shall be considered.
x. Resignation. A formal letter of resignation shall be required to be sent to the Secretary
of Technical Affairs, the society and the faculty advisor. The Secretary of Technical
Affairs reserves the right to accept or reject the letter after discussion. The resignee
shall reserve the right to stay in the society or leave altogether.
8. Finances and Budget.
i. Budgets required for events must be sent with the necessary details two weeks before
the event. Following approval by the faculty advisor and modifications by the
Technical Committee, it shall be presented to the Dean of Students for approval.
ii. A record of all budgets sanctioned and expenditures incurred must be maintained along
with digital copies of bills and invoices. They must be shared with the Technical
Committee and the Finance Committee within one week of the completion of an event.
iii. Chapters of external organisations and departmental societies shall receive approvals
and sanctions from their parent organisations or departments. The aforementioned
records must be detailed, and the Technical Committee reserves the right to inspect
them at their discretion. Discrepancies shall lead to suspension of the Core Committee
until further notice.
9. Events. All talks, symposiums, conferences, workshops, competitions, projects, and
publications (non-exhaustive) recognised by the Technical Committee will be considered
events conducted by the society.
i. Each club shall conduct at least two general body meetings every semester.
Representatives of the Technical Committee may attend under extraordinary
circumstances. Documentation shall be shared with the Committee.
ii. Each club must conduct at least two events per academic year. If the club fails to meet
this criteria, at the discretion of the Secretary of Culture after consulting the Secretary
of Technical Affairs it will be rendered a dormant club, and the core shall be dissolved.
iii. All events and schedules must be approved by the faculty advisor, the Cultural
Committee and the Dean of Students.
iv. Event reports must be shared with the Technical Committee one week after the
conclusion of the event. Failure to comply shall lead to a warning. Persistence shall
lead to an intimation to the faculty advisor.
Section 4. Representing the University in Inter-Collegiate Events.
1. The Technical Committee shall coordinate with Technical Societies for participation in
external events, and representatives shall accompany university contingents.
2. Students on academic or disciplinary probation will not be provided any funding whatsoever.
Illicit activities or breach of decorum at events while representing the university shall lead
to strict action, including but not limited to not being allowed for external participation for
one semester.
3. All participants must be selected by the society/club/chapter based on fair criteria overseen
by the Technical Committee. Approval from the faculty advisor and the Technical
Committee shall be required to participate and represent the university.
4. If students wishing to participate in the competition do not represent any technical society,
they shall require prior permission from the Secretary of Technical Affairs and the Dean of
Students to avail university resources.
Section 5. Formation of a New Society.
1. Any proposed society must adhere to the core structure and Appointment regulations
prescribed in this Annexure.
2. Formation shall require at least one faculty advisor. The Technical Committee shall not be
responsible for the same.
3. Any proposal to form a new society must include the aim, mission, structure, rules and
protocols, which shall then be presented to the Dean of Students along with a signed letter
from the proposed faculty advisor after approval from the Secretary of Technical Affairs and
Secretary of Culture. The decision reached by the Dean shall be binding.
4. Departmental societies shall additionally require signed permissions from the Head of
Department, which shall then be presented in a joint session with the Secretary of Technical
Affairs and the Head of the respective department.
Section 6. The Technical Committee shall meet at least once a semester. It shall be mandatory
for all members to attend the meeting. Absenteeism shall be excused only if a prior note is
addressed to the Secretary of Technical Affairs.
Annexure I – The Food Affairs Committee
Section 1. Responsibility and Scope. This committee, henceforth addressed as the Food Affairs
Committee (FAC), shall be responsible to:
1. Coordinate student issues related to food affairs at the university and enable students to
participate as partners to improve the university's dining quality.
2. Listen to and advise the university administration and the student body regarding issues
concerning consumers and customers at the Dining Halls and other food outlets/vendors
on campus.
3. Plan and implement food/quality-related training for committee members and other
students.
Section 2. Structure. The committee shall consist of the following:
1. One Secretary of Food Affairs shall be appointed in accordance with Article III Section 5.
They shall:
i. Present and report the Committee proceedings to the Council.
ii. Be responsible for implementing suggestions and feedback from the Council and
student body.
iii. Ensure weekly meetings with Committee heads take place.
iv. Address the Senate at the beginning of their tenure and outline the agenda for the
upcoming year.
v. Appoint the Chairperson as the de facto deputy and head of the Core Committee.
vi. Actively look for ways and means to improve the (1) Quality and (2)
Availability of food.
2. Membership
The general body composition for the Food Affairs Committee will comprise the following
positions to keep occupied at all times. Failure to adhere will lead to re-constitution by the
Secretary of Food Affairs.
i. There shall be one Chairperson.
ii. There shall be at least four Core Committee members
iii. There shall be a minimum of six associate members
iv. There shall be one advisor, who must be a previous core committee member of
FAC.
v. There shall be one representative from the Office of Administration or Office of
Dean of Students.
3. Eligibility
To be considered eligible for appointment to the Food Affairs Committee, one should:
i. Have a minimum CGPA of 6.50.
ii. Have no academic arrears.
iii. Have no record of disciplinary action against them in the due course of their stay.
iv. Have been part of the Core Committee of FAC in the outgoing tenure (for the post of
Chairperson)
v. Have been a member of the Food Affairs Committee in any previous tenure (for the
Core Committee)
4. The Food Affairs Committee shall hold a ‘Core Committee’, further explained in subsection
6.
5. One Chairperson shall deputise the Secretary of Food Affairs in matters concerning the Food
Affairs Committee. The Chairperson shall be the head of the core committee (expanded in
subsection 6) and shall be:
i. Nominated and appointed after interviews with the Secretary of Food Affairs,
Secretary of Senate and the Office Bearers.
ii. Heading the Food Affairs Committee and addressing the committees (refer to
subsection 7).
iii. Calling meetings with the Core Committee or Associate Members of the committee
or both.
6. The Core Committee, headed by the Chairperson, shall have the following duties and
responsibilities,
i. Act as a representative body, along with the Secretary of Food Affairs, to the Head of
Administration and Dean of Students to regulate the prices of all food items on
campus.
ii. Collect student feedback on the dining experience and vendor experience. Evaluate
the feedback and submit a report documenting all needs and necessities for the dining
halls, kiosks and cafeterias on campus to the Office of Head Administration and
Office of Dean of Students and recommend the start, suspension and shut down of
any food outlet on campus based on student feedback.
iii. Supervising food quality by conducting frequent quality checks on various food
outlets on campus and recommending suitability/renewal/termination of contracts
based on hygiene, safety norms, kitchen discipline, storage and overall student
feedback. Submit a report to the Office of Administration and Office of Dean of
Students to propose implementing feedback or corrective measures.
iv. Ensure overall discipline and conduct, as well as compliance with vendor rules in the
dining halls and food outlets with vendors, staff, and members of the Council. A report
shall be made in case of any misconduct and submitted to the Dean of Students.
v. Ensure proper waste disposal and suggest efficient ways to avoid food wastage and
discourage theft, such as utensils from the Dining Halls and food outlets.
vi. Receiving, assessing, and taking appropriate measures based on the feedback
provided by the campus community and the customers of the food outlets on campus.
vii. Conducting surprise checks with the food service providers to ensure the stocks,
hygiene and other records are maintained properly.
viii. Deciding the menu for Breakfast, Lunch and Dinner buffet meals, and the system of
the model followed at the Dining Halls.
ix. Coordinate with the Office of Administration to decide on a special menu for
festivals, occasions or important events.
x. Ensuring that all displayed items are available and that they are available at the agreed
rates.
xi. Quality Control Responsibilities
1. Food Inspection shall take place twice a month at a minimum. The parameters
and structure of the inspection process are as follows,
▪ There shall be a thorough check for the stock of food ingredients the
vendor uses.
▪ There shall be a check for the kitchen area by inspecting for the
maintenance of adequate hygiene standards.
▪ There shall be a check for the area of operation with the main focus on
proper maintenance of adequate hygiene standards.
▪ There shall be a check for the hygiene maintained by the staff during the
time of service.
▪ There shall be a check for the quality and the taste of the food the vendor
serves.
▪ There shall be a check for the maintenance of the cutlery that the vendor
provides.
▪ There shall be a check of the dining spaces and general maintenance of
the seating in the dining halls, kiosks and outlets. This shall include the
washrooms, ventilation, waste disposal and other areas concerning
student dining space.
▪ Food Taste Checks
i. A roster shall be maintained for daily food quality checks based
on taste, variety and likability by the student body.
ii. The roster must be inclusive of subjective opinions and shall
comprise diverse voices to judge better the meals prepared. For
the same, various members of the Senate can be requested to join.
iii. Duties shall be delegated to any member of the FAC, and a report
based on a template is to be sent to the Secretary of Food Affairs
upon completion of the check.
iv. A monthly report will be prepared by the SoFA, on advisement of
the Chairperson and shared with the Office Bearers and Head of
Administration and Dean of Students to recap major areas of
frequent complaints and a suggested plan of action.
2. Report Generation.
▪ The members of the inspection team shall compile a report after an
inspection on any food outlet on the campus of Shiv Nadar University,
which shall be based on the feedback from each member of the
inspection team.
▪ The report shall be submitted to the Office of Director of Administration,
Office of Dean of Students and subsequently be made available to the
student body by the Secretary of Food Affairs (on behalf of the
Chairperson and the Committee) within one week after the inspection.
7. Standing Committees
i. Core Committee (as previously mentioned in Section 2, subsection 6)
ii. Committee of Associates, who shall
1. Act as an intermediary between the Core Committee and the student
population and
2. Assist in the implementation of the decisions taken by the Core
Committee.
___________________________________________________________________________________
Annexure J – Amendment to the Constitution
The following format must be used to propose amendments to the Constitution.
*****************************************************************************
Resolution to Amend the Constitution
Subject of Resolution: Defining Cultural Committee Core Positions
Intent of Resolution: To make it easier to differentiate between different roles and
responsibilities of the Cultural Committee’s core members
Whereas:
Annexure G Section 2 states:
1. Secretary of Culture, who shall be appointed in accordance with Article III Section 5
2. Two Chairpersons, who shall deputise for the Secretary of Culture in matters concerning
the Cultural Committee.
3. External Affairs Secretary: One External Affairs Secretary to facilitate and coordinate
external opportunities for cultural clubs and the broader university community.
4. Members from the Senate appointed in accordance with Article II Section 6. They shall be
termed Members.
5. Volunteers recruited for smooth conduct of events.
(state the Article/Section/Clause where a problem is being faced)
Whereas:
The problem affects the cultural committee functioning, as it is hard to distinguish between the
roles of different cultural committee core members.
(Describe the scope of the problem, persons involved and any contradictions faced or observed)
Whereas:
The impact is that division of work often becomes difficult, it becomes unclear to those joining
what kind of work they are signing up for which means that the committee becomes inefficient
in using its members for the skills they possess.
(Describe the impact faced by the student body / concerned individuals due to said problems)
Therefore, be it resolved that:
The clause be amended to:
1. Secretary of Culture, who shall be appointed in accordance with Article III Section 5
2. Cultural Committee Admin consisting of:
i. Two Chairpersons, who shall deputise for the Secretary of Culture in
matters concerning the Cultural Committee.
ii. Roles such as Cultural Coordinator(s) and/or Cultural Advisor(s) as need
be.
3. Cultural Committee Core who shall consist of positions such as Creative Director, Head of
Partnerships, etc. as need be.
i. One External Affairs Secretary as part of Cultural Committee Core to
facilitate and coordinate external opportunities for cultural clubs and the
broader university community.
4. Cultural Committee Leads who shall lead the various teams in the cultural committee.
5. Members from the Senate appointed in accordance with Article II Section 6. They shall be
termed Members.
6. Volunteers recruited for smooth conduct of events.
(Propose the amendment here with the exact wording and intent)
Resolved by the Senate that the Student Council of Shiv Nadar University at its regular session,
on the 11th day of March, 2025, two-thirds of all members elected voting in favour thereof, at
this moment proposes that Clause 8, Section 7 of Article II of the Constitution be amended as
mentioned above.
Respectfully submitted,
Easwar Balakrishnan