Contents
Message from The Vice-Chancellor 03
Message from The Dean of Students 04
Department of Student Affairs 10
Sports 16
Student Support System 18
Complaints Committee (UNIVERSITY LEVEL) 21
Important Email Address 26
Other Services 27
Code of Conduct 31
Hostel Rules 34
Communication within Hostels 40
Information Technology & Online/SNU Links Resources 41
Undergraduate Degree Requirements 45
Opportunities for Undergraduate Research (Our) 49
Student Mobility and Exchange Program 50
Library Online Public Access Catalogue 52
Alumni Relations Office 53
Offices and Services 55
Annexure A 59
Annexure B 59
Annexure C 60
Frequently Asked Question 66
Academic Calendar Monsoon 2025 71
Emergency Services 71
2
Message from
the Vice-Chancellor
Congratulations on your admission to the Shiv
Nadar Institution of Eminence (Shiv Nadar IoE).
At Shiv Nadar IoE, we strive to empower you and
realize your full potential.
We have achieved much over a relatively short
period, and I am confident that the coming years
will elevate the university to the global stage with
many more significant achievements.
Our students are at the very heart of our mission.
I strongly encourage you to actively participate
and follow your passion and aim for excellence in
whatever you do.
You will find great mentors amongst our faculty
and staff, and through our vibrant campus’
social and cultural life, you will also be making
connections and friendships that will last a
lifetime.
The future is yours to build. We will all be
facilitators in your learning and aspirations.
Congratulations again and welcome.
Professor Ananya Mukherjee
Vice-Chancellor
3
Message from
Dean of Students
Dear Students, respects diversity and encourages innovation.
As you return after a long summer break, we remain We have no place for any form of discrimination,
committed to supporting your continuing journey disrespect, or bullying in any form, and zero
of growth and evolution on campus. A warm tolerance for ragging. Be thoughtful and kind in all
welcome to the Batch of 2029, who join us this you say and do, support each other on this journey,
year. I wish you a happy and enriching time at Shiv so that everyone feels included and enabled in
Nadar Institution of Eminence. every sense. Be particularly careful to use social
media responsibly, and refrain from any form of
Renovation of your hostels, classrooms and dining hate speech or hurtful content. You could just as
halls has been undertaken while you have been well be at the receiving end of it, and it certainly
away. We are also in the process of renovating some does you no credit to generate, or spread, hurtful
of the existing sports facilities, besides improving content.
your access to fitness and recreational sport. You
will find an expanded gym in response to popular Do familiarise yourselves with the Student Code
demand, and new facilities for five-a-side futsal of Conduct and the University Rules and do not
as well as box cricket and Teqball, a new sport we indulge in activities that could lead to unwanted
hope many of you will enjoy playing! consequences for yourselves and others.
The facilities and opportunities available to you at The Department of Student Affairs will continue to
Shiv Nadar IoE are truly world class. I hope you make work for your well-being, as we remain committed
use of them. While your academic performance to keeping the campus a safe, enabling and
is of paramount importance, all work, and no play enjoyable place to live, work and play for all of you.
does you no good at all. An active lifestyle, coupled
with a healthy diet and enough sleep go a long way Have a good year ahead.
to ensuring that you are better able to overcome
daily challenges and build your capacity to thrive.
A word of guidance for Freshers, as you start a new
exciting journey. Freed from the exacting school
routine you have grown up with, some of you will
struggle to regulate your day and activities in a
University environment. Here it is important for
you to ensure that you maintain a good routine and
keep up with your classes and assignments.
Your student mentors, the Family Heads, and Peer
Guides are responsible and caring seniors, who
have walked in your shoes, and will now help you
find your feet at SNU. Do reach out to them for
assistance and support, or just to take advice on
anything you are grappling with.
Brigadier Steve Ismail (Retd)
Ours is an inclusive and enabling University that Dean of Students
4
University
Vision and Mission
To become a globally recognized research university committed to excellence in teaching,
discovery and innovation, scholarship, and service so as to expand the scope of human
understanding and contributing to the betterment of the world.
To develop and educate the path-shapers of tomorrow, capable of responsible and ethical
leadership.
To support research, scholarly, and creative endeavors that contribute to the creation of new
knowledge at the frontiers of specialized areas, as well as at the interface of diverse disciplines.
To establish research and teaching programs to address the most pressing problems of India and
the global community.
5
Shiv Nadar
University
Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence, Delhi-NCR, is a student-centric, multidisciplinary, and
research-focused University offering a wide range of academic programmes at the undergraduate,
masters’ and doctoral levels. The university was set up in 2011 by the Shiv Nadar Foundation, a
philanthropic foundation established by Mr. Shiv Nadar, founder of HCL. The University aims to
become a globally acclaimed centre for learning and innovation in the fields of engineering, natural
sciences, humanities & social sciences, and management. University curriculum is delivered by a
select, world-class faculty with doctoral and postdoctoral experience from ranked universities all
over the world.
Shiv Nadar IoE has been recognized as an ‘Institution of Eminence’ by the Government of India in
2022.
6
Leadership
Mr. Shiv Nadar Mr. Shikhar Malhotra
Founder Chancellor
Dr. Ananya Mukherjee Dr. Rajat Kathuria
Vice-Chancellor Dean, School of Humanities &
Social Sciences
Dr. Sanjeev Galande Dr. Suneet Tuli
Dean, Dean,
School of Natural Sciences School of Engineering
7
Dr. Rajeev Kumar Singh Dr. Rajesh Chakrabarti
Dean, Dean,
International Programs School of Management
and Entrepreneurship
Brigadier Steve Ismail (Retd) Mr. Sudhir Naudiyal
Dean of Students Registrar
8
The aim of the Student Handbook is to provide you with information about various aspects of studying at Shiv
Nadar Institution of Eminence, assisting you in comprehending and navigating the various components of your
journey here.
This handbook contains important university rules and policies. Additionally, it offers contact information and
website links. In addition to this handbook, please also consult the UG handbook and other Policies available
on the snulinks page for further information.
This Student Handbook is available on the University website ‘In life at Shiv Nadar’ section. the
link is: https://snu.edu.in/student-life/
This edition of the handbook pertains to the Academic Year 2025-2026 and supersedes any
earlier edition. This Student Handbook is available on the University website and on the intranet,
SNU Links: https://snulinks.snu.edu.in/
Shiv Nadar IoE, Delhi-NCR, trusts students to act responsibly and do what is best for them and for the
University and believes in giving them the freedom and information to support their decisions.
In turn, the University expects students to demonstrate responsibility and self-discipline. The intent is to create
a sense of ownership that fosters responsible behaviour. This extends to responsible use of the resources
available to you and the respect for others’ rights to freedom and expression. Students come from diverse
backgrounds, beliefs, regions, religions, cultures, perspectives, gender, and experiences. Inclusivity plays an
extremely important role in the success of the Shiv Nadar IoE community. The university expects everyone
to understand and appreciate diversity. The goal is to foster an environment that helps everyone thrive and
create a positive impact.
9
1.DEPARTMENT OF STUDENT AFFAIRS
Shiv Nadar IoE being a fully residential campus offers more than just academics. Life beyond the classroom is
an integral part of your educational journey and student experience at the University.
DSA is responsible for enhancing your university experience by:
1. Overseeing residential life, food, healthcare, life on campus and cultural and sports activities.
2. Providing support for any campus-related challenges.
3. Ensuring inclusivity for specially abled students and those from minority or economically marginalised
communities.
4. Formulating and implementing the general Code of Conduct for all students at the University.
5. Facilitating extra and co-curricular activities, and events as well as overseeing the functioning of student
governance.
1.1 Student Clubs & Societies
• At Shiv Nadar IoE, Clubs and Societies play a crucial role in personal growth, building connections, and
exploring passions.
• Students can connect with other like-minded students through over fifty clubs, leadership organizations,
and technical societies.
• Clubs and Societies provide dynamic hubs for pursuing common interests, developing skills, expanding
networks and are an outlet for creative expression.
• Activities include workshops, seminars, competitions, performances, and social gatherings.
• Members gain valuable experiences, enhance leadership abilities, and cultivate qualities like teamwork and
time management.
• Clubs and societies contribute to holistic development and provide diverse learning experiences within the
Institution.
• Students are encouraged to explore these diverse opportunities for personal and professional growth.
Instagram Profiles for all the Cultural & Technical clubs are mentioned in Annexure C.
10
1.2 Igniting Students Entrepreneurship
At the core of Shiv Nadar University’s innovation ecosystem is Shiv Nadar AIC (Atal Incubation Centre)—a not-
for-profit incubator driving entrepreneurial excellence on campus. Supported by national innovation bodies
including the Atal Innovation Mission (NITI Aayog), Startup India Seed Fund Scheme (SISFS), Department
of Science and Technology (DST), and the Ministry of Electronics and IT (MeitY), the Centre empowers the
next generation of changemakers.
With a strong focus on student-led innovation, Shiv Nadar AIC provides comprehensive support—including
expert mentoring, prototyping facilities, market access, and funding opportunities—through various
government and institutional schemes. It runs multiple flagship initiatives such as Startup Cradle, an annual
capacity-building program for Shiv Nadar University students; Venture Challenge, a structured incubation
platform for accelerating, and growing ventures across various geographies; and InvestoPitch, an investor
connect forum for high-potential ventures. The incubator has also facilitated ₹1.5 crore+ in seed and pre-seed
funding support under schemes like SISFS and MeitY’s GENESIS.
To date, Shiv Nadar AIC has supported over 150 startups across diverse sectors including DeepTech,
HealthTech, EdTech, Cleantech, and Mobility. More than 20 student ventures have been nurtured and funded
through Startup Cradle, reflecting the growing spirit of innovation among the university’s student community.
One recent example is TRACER, a student-led startup developing an AI-powered road condition monitoring
solution. Out of 3 student-led ventures that applied for funding under the GENESIS Entrepreneurship-in-
Residence (EIR) program, TRACER was selected and funded—exemplifying the university’s deep-tech potential
being applied to real-world infrastructure challenges.
Beyond structured programs, Shiv Nadar AIC plays a central role in nurturing the entrepreneurship ecosystem
within the university. In collaboration with student-led clubs and academic departments, AIC supports a range
of innovation-focused initiatives—hackathons, demo days, ideation challenges, and speaker series with startup
founders and industry leaders.
With a network of 40+ expert mentors and 30+ strategic partners, Shiv Nadar AIC continues to embed
entrepreneurship into the academic fabric of the university—equipping students not just with ideas, but the
tools to turn them into impactful ventures to shape India’s innovation future.
11
1.3 Breeze
Breeze is the University’s annual techno-cultural fest, bringing together students from across the country
to participate in and enjoy a variety of performances and events. The event provides students from our
University and other institutions a platform to showcase their creativity and enjoy a wide array of activities
and performances. It has grown from its 2012 launch into a signature campus event celebrating artistic
excellence and student creativity.
For more insights, please visit the Instagram page.
https://instagram.com/breeze.snu?igshid=2hpbeosp2eaj
1.4 Housing and Accommodation
The student hostels are state-of-the-art, and gender segregated. They are designed to cater to individual
requirements of personal space, while also incorporating a culture of shared living. Each room is designed as a
comfortable independent unit with basic in-built utilities.
The hostel facilities are spread over 18 buildings across the campus. Wardens are assigned to ensure smooth
functioning of various facets of hygiene, safety, security and miscellaneous needs of the student community.
Each hostel has certain common facilities as below:
Study Rooms:
Each hostel has designated study rooms, where students can study, do their academic projects etc. These
rooms are air conditioned, are under CCTV surveillance and have access control. All study rooms have LAN
ports on the desk that offer data at high speed to be utilized on a shared basis by all residents. These 24x7
study rooms are meant for academic work and the users are strongly advised to maintain the decorum of the
place.
Recreation Rooms:
Common rooms offer recreational facilities such as TV, table tennis and yoga/other activities. Students can
use these facilities in their leisure time.
Laundry Services:
The hostels have an efficient laundry system. While an authorized vendor provides on-campus laundry services,
there are domestic washing machines in hostels for use by students for their personal needs, restricted to only
small / sensitive clothes that cannot be given to laundry. Washing of blankets, shoes, jackets, foot mats etc.
in the washing machines is not allowed. The washing machines may only be used from 0600 hours to 2300
hours all seven days of the week.
12
Room Configuration and Facilities:
The rooms in various buildings are of different configuration - single accommodation with attached or common
washrooms, twin accommodation with common washrooms and studio type accommodation. Rooms are
allotted to students as per university policy. The rooms and washrooms are well-fitted and are designed to
maintain essential hygiene standards. The common areas in all the hostels are Wi-Fi enabled. The common
areas of hostels are cleaned daily, while the individual hostel rooms are cleaned twice a week by the house
keeping staff as per the schedule placed close to the lift in every hostel.
Pantries:
Each hostel is provided with a pantry on the ground floor, equipped with microwave oven, egg boilers,
induction cook tops, toaster and instant geysers for hot drinking water. Purified water is available on all floors
at all hours for the convenience of the students. The pantries may be used only for preparation of light snacks
and are not meant to be an alternative to the dining halls. Cooking is not permitted in the hostels.Residents are
to ensure that the pantries are used and maintained in a neat and hygienic manner. Misuse of pantry facilities
may result in debarment of further access.
13
1.5 Health & Wellness
The campus is equipped with a Health & Wellness Centre that offers comprehensive primary medical and
mental health support. This includes a primary care facility and an Outpatient Department (OPD), providing
round-the-clock care for medical emergencies and pre-hospital treatment.
The Centre features observation and emergency rooms, fully equipped and staffed by qualified paramedics.
A General Physician (GP), nursing staff, and ambulance services are available 24/7. In case of emergencies
requiring advanced care, both an Advanced Life Support (ALS) ambulance and a Patient Transport
Ambulance (PTA) are on standby to transfer patients to tertiary care facilities.
Students can book OPD appointments online via https://www.healthyhcl.in/snioe/#book
Habit Health App ( available on playstore/Appstore ) or visit the clinic directly for walk-in consultations.
Pathology sample collection is also available at the Centre on a paid basis.
A 24/7 pharmacy is located on campus to meet all OPD and general medical needs. It stocks over-the-
counter medicines, prescription medications (available on order), and a range of health and hygiene products.
Adjusting to life away from home can be challenging. The Centre provides mental health support to help
students manage stress, anxiety, depression, and other emotional concerns. Two clinical psychologists reside
on campus and are available for counselling. Additionally, a psychiatrist visits the Centre once a week for
consultations.
Specialist services include weekly visits from a gynecologist, and fortnightly consultations with an
orthopedist a dermatologist and a psychiatrist. Physiotherapists are available every weekday to assist with
pain management and rehabilitation.
Dental services are also offered. Dentists provide free consultations every weekday, and dental procedures
can be availed at a nominal cost.
Students are referred to the following super specialty hospitals in case of need:-
1. Kailash Hospital, Greater Noida
2. Yatharth Hospital, Greater Noida
3. Fortis Hospital, Greater Noida
14
Medical Insurance
We are committed to the overall health and wellbeing of our students. In addition to the health center
on- campus, students are provided medical insurance by The Aditya Birla Insurance Company Limited. This
covers medical issues that require hospitalization beyond the on-campus services. This is a seamless policy
which covers cashless hospital admission and treatment up to ₹ 2.5 lakh. All UG, PG, and PHD students are
covered under this policy. The enrolment and policy details are available with the hostel administration and
in case of any query. The salient features of the health insurance are communicated to the students during
orientation as a part of their registration process when they join Shiv Nadar IoE.
Salient features of the Policy are:
• Valid for 12 months, till such time they are enrolled with the university, including while on leave.
• 4000+ hospitals are covered across the country.
• No room capping.
• No waiting periods.
• Ambulance charges up to ₹2000/- per hospitalization.
• Pre-Hospitalization and Post Hospitalization for 30 days & 60 days respectively are covered.
15
2. SPORTS
Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence has a vibrant Sports department headed by the Deputy Director, Sports
with qualified coaches, that encourages all students to not only excel in academics but also to learn, train,
and play sports regularly.
The SNIoE Sports Program is designed to promote physical fitness, teamwork, discipline, and sportsmanship
among all students. Participation in sports activities is an integral part of student life and supports the
holistic development of every individual. In addition to daily training, learning and in-house competitions,
students are encouraged to participate in external tournaments hosted by other Universities, AIU
competitions, and in National / International tournaments.
Through sports, students discover that true success lies beyond trophies and titles— it’s found in teamwork,
shared purpose, and the lasting impact we have on those around us.
2.1 Facilities
Shiv Nadar IOE has a state-of-the-art Indoor Sports Complex (ISC) with 1,20,000 sq. ft of area and a
centrally air-conditioned central hall, which won the NDTV 2017 award for design architecture.
The ISC houses two large Gymnasium halls, four Squash courts, four Taraflex badminton courts, two indoor
maple-floored basketball courts, six Table-tennis tables, a chess hall, an Indoor running track, an artificial
climbing wall, and a recreation room with facilities for 8-ball pool, carrom and foosball.
Outdoor sports facilities are operational from 6 am in the morning until 9 pm at night under the supervision
of highly skilled and experienced coaches. These include three synthetic Basketball courts, three synthetic
Tennis courts, two football fields, two volleyball courts, two outdoor badminton courts, one Cricket field
with four practice nets, a 9-hole Golf course, an outdoor artificial climbing wall, and Equestrian training
facilities.
16
2.2 Surge
Surge is the annual Inter-University Sports festival of Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence. The festival was
first held in 2021 and has since grown to become one of the largest inter-collegiate sports events in the
country.
In addition to competitive sports, Surge also serves as a platform for promoting physical fitness,
sportsmanship, and event management among the student community.
Surge features over 2300+ athletes from 70+ institutions across the country, competing in a wide range of
sports including athletics, basketball, badminton, cricket, football, futsal, lawn tennis, table tennis, volleyball
and esports. The three-day sports extravaganza encourages students to participate in sports activities in a
competitive and educational environment, complete with cultural and entertainment performances.
2.3 SNUSL (Shiv Nadar IoE Sports League)
Shiv Nadar IoE Sports League (SNUSL) is a student Sports Council led initiative, which has helped the
university to build stronger Varsity teams and provides an opportunity for spotting sports talent among the
students. Over the years, participation in SNUSL has increased among the student community of Shiv Nadar
IoE. The students are divided into four clubs, namely Bulls, Falcons, Panthers, and Phoenix, which compete
against each other in various sports competitions throughout the calendar year.
SPORTS GUIDELINES:
• All students are granted equal access to sporting facilities and activities.
• Students are required to disclose any medical conditions to the Sports Department before participating in
any sporting activities.
• All students are required to bring their own personal sports equipment, such as racquets for racquet
sports etc. Cricketers and footballers must have their personal kits, including footwear, towels, caps, water
bottles, and other necessary items.
• Students must wear the designated sports apparel during training sessions and official matches.
• All new and existing students must use sport-specific footwear. This includes running shoes (with extra
pairs), football studs, non-marking shoes for indoor sports, basketball shoes, tennis shoes, and cricket shoes,
as appropriate. Proper footwear is mandatory to ensure both performance and injury prevention as well as
preservation of the facilities.
• Adherence to game rules and sportsmanship is mandatory.
• Students who require the use of lockers at the ISC may be allotted one upon request, subject to
availability. Athletes are solely responsible for the security and maintenance of the contents stored in their
assigned lockers. Loss or misplacement of locker keys will result in a fine.
• Students are expected to handle all sports equipment and facilities responsibly. Damages caused by
negligence will be chargeable to the student responsible.
• Students must demonstrate respect towards teammates, opponents, coaches, and officials at all times.
• Students are strictly prohibited from playing Cricket or any other sport on the outdoor synthetic courts
(basketball and tennis) other than the sport the court is designated for. Violators will be fined.
• Walking through the Cricket field of play is prohibited and violators will be fined. The proper use and
upkeep of our sporting facilities is of paramount importance.
17
3. STUDENT SUPPORT SYSTEM
3.1 Family Groups
All first-year undergraduates are assigned to a Family Group, guided by a Family Head selected from the
senior batches, to aid in a seamless and friendly transition during the initial phases of settling in. The Family
Head guides, supports, and facilitates the student’s access to any necessary information, and serves as a
friendly and accessible mentor for Freshers on campus. The Family Heads and their activities are guided by
the Associate Director and Head of Student Life.
3.2 Department of Student Affairs Helpdesk (ODS Helpdesk)
ODS Helpdesk acts as the primary level of support for the students to reach out to on non-academic
matters. It is manned by a responsible senior student, and functions for extended hours. The ODS help desk
collates queries or reports received from students over email and forwards them to the relevant authority
for processing and resolution.
Mailing ID: odshelpdesk@snu.edu.in
3.3 Gender Champions
Gender Champions are responsible students who facilitate an enabling environment within the Shiv Nadar
Institution of Eminence, where every gender is treated with dignity and respect. They strengthen the
understanding and potential of the young students to advocate for gender equality and strive for progress
towards gender justice.
3.4 Peer Support Guides
In the bustling world of university life, where academic challenges intertwine with personal growth, we have
in place a vital support system known as Peer Support Guides (PSGs). These dedicated volunteers are not
merely students; they are the nurturing guardians associated with family heads, entrusted with the task of
fostering a sense of belonging and well-being within their designated family groups. At the heart of their
mission lies a profound commitment to safeguarding the mental and emotional welfare of every student
associated with them. Peer Support Guides report to the Associate Director and Head of Student Life and
carry out various engagement activities in consultation with her.
3.5 YourDost Online Counselling Services
Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence has associated with YourDOST, to provide our students with round the
clock access, online and via a dedicated helpline, to qualified providers of emotional and wellness support.
Consultations may be on any matter that a member of the student community is facing and are entirely
private and confidential. Students have benefitted by accessing YourDost on issues related to stress, career,
academics, relationships, self-confidence, and many other personal matters.
18
3.6 Campus Buddy (for International Students)
Every international student is assigned a student volunteer as a Campus Buddy. The Campus Buddy assists
the international student in settling down and in navigating various aspects of campus life.Campus buddies
play a crucial role in fostering a welcoming and inclusive campus environment, and enhancing the overall
student experience for international students.
3.7 On-Campus Jobs (OCJ)
Undergraduate students who meet laid down performance criteria are provided opportunities, from the
second year onwards, to work with different departments on campus. OCJs assist in the functioning of
the department they are assigned to and gain experiential and applied learning, which helps them develop
workplace ethics, leadership qualities, and service attributes.
Possible jobs under this policy may include (but are not limited to) extending assistance in laboratory and
library management, monitoring projects, conducting surveys and analysing feedback, managing help desks,
aiding departments in enabling functions of the University like Admissions, Career Development Centre,
Department of Student Affairs, Administration, Hostels, Sports, and allied activities, etc.
Students doing OCJs are paid a stipend for their work, which helps them to imbibe a sense of accountability
and responsibility. Students will be paid 100 rupees per hour for OCJs during the academic sessions, with
a maximum limit of 20 hours per week. During vacations, the payment will be 75 rupees per hour, with a
maximum limit of 40 hours per week. For students engaged in OCJ during summer vacations, the hostel fee
for that period should be borne by the sponsoring department. For details, please visit
SNU Links: https://ocj.webapps.snu.edu.in/
For queries related to OCJ,
please contact: Department of Student Affairs in D010.
Eligibility:
• OCJs are open to all undergraduate students except first year and certain masters’ degree programs
(without any Teaching Assistantship and only for jobs specific to post-graduate programs) of Shiv Nadar IoE.
• Students must maintain satisfactory academic progress (CGPA above 6.0) , have a good disciplinary record
and adhere to the policies and guidelines set by the Institute to retain an OCJ position.
Circulars and Application Process:
The OCJ process is exactly like a formal ‘recruitment’ process in any well-managed company. The positions
are formally advertised to the student community. Circulars for OCJs are posted via email from the DSA
office, along with an application form and job description. Interested students should submit the application
form to apply for the jobs. Candidates are interviewed by the respective departments and are made an offer
upon selection.
19
3.8 Campus Affairs – Hostel Committee
The Student Led Hostel Committee looks after the Hostel Affairs. The Student Council selects a Secretary of
Campus Affairs and assigns Senators to be the Heads of the Hostel Committee. These four Senators along
with the Secretary of Campus Affairs conduct interviews and select members for the Hostel Committee. The
Hostel Committee consists of members, with at least one person from each hostel block having the status of
a student and residing in the respective blocks.
Duties of the Hostel Committee
• The heads of the hostel committee report to the Secretary of Campus Affairs regarding the effective
discharge of duties by the hostel committee.
• They interface with their respective wardens at least once a fortnight and discuss with them the issues
in their respective hostels.
• They represent the general welfare of the students residing in the hostel and assist the council and
wardens in maintaining the living standards.
• The committee, in coordination with the maintenance, ensures proper maintenance of the hostel rooms,
common room, toilets, and premises.
• They report any unauthorized use or misuse of hostel rooms and bring to notice any untoward incident
occurring in the hostel premises to the warden.
• The hostel committee requires to meet at least once a month. These meetings are presided over by the
Secretary of Campus Affairs. Once in two months the committee along with Campus Affair Secretary
meets the Head Hostel Administration.
• Town halls to address to hostel concerns are conducted periodically, to be organized by the
Campus Affairs Secretary along with the hostel committee and attended by member of the Hostel
Administration.
3.9 Canine welfare on Campus
• SNU is home to a rich and diverse biodiversity, and among its most visible and beloved members are the
campus dogs. These dogs play an integral role in the campus ecosystem, bringing warmth and familiarity to
the university environment.
• Dedicated efforts have ensured the well-being of both the dogs and people on campus led by FETCH,
SNIoE’s official canine welfare club. For any queries or further information, please reach out via the contact
email provided (fetch.fg@snu.edu.in).
• All female and male dogs within the campus and a one kilometer radius have been sterilized.
• Every dog has received anti-rabies vaccinations, creating a safe and healthy environment for students and
animals alike.
• These ongoing care and control initiatives promote responsible canine care. For members of the campus
community who may feel uneasy around dogs, support and guidance is available to help maintain a safe and
inclusive space for everyone.
20
4. COMPLAINTS COMMITTEE (UNIVERSITY LEVEL)
4.1 Anti-Ragging Cell
Ragging: Ragging includes, but is not limited to, actions such as: display of noisy, disorderly conduct, or
performing any act which causes or is likely to cause physical or psychological harm or raise apprehension or
fear, shame, or embarrassment to a student in any academic institution.
This includes teasing, abusing, playing practical jokes, or causing hurt to students, or asking a student to do
any act, or perform something, which a student would not in the ordinary course be willing to do.
UGC Regulations on curbing the menace of ragging in higher educational institutions cover any act
of physical or mental abuse (including bullying and exclusion) targeted at another student (Fresher or
otherwise) on grounds of colour, race, religion, caste, ethnicity, gender (including transgender), sexual
orientation, appearance, nationality, regional origins, linguistic identity, place of birth, place of residence or
economic background. For more details, please refer to Clause 3 of Anti Ragging Regulation of UGC in the
link given below:
www.antiragging.in/assets/pdf/information/english/what_constitues_ragging.pdf
The University gives paramount importance to safety and security of every student and follows a zero-
tolerance policy towards ragging.
As per the directives of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India and the University Grants Commission, ragging
is a cognizable and punishable offence and is prohibited on or off campus. The University shall act in
accordance with the UGC regulations on curbing the menace of ragging in higher educational institutions,
2009, against those found guilty of ragging and/or abetting ragging, actively or passively, or being part of a
conspiracy to promote ragging.
All students, enrolled in any UG, Masters or PhD programme are mandatorily required to file an anti-ragging
affidavit on the website www.antiragging.in by 30 June every year, in order to be eligible for enrollment and
residence on campus.
Details on measures aimed at curbing the menace of ragging in higher educational institutions 2009, are
given at:
https://snu.edu.in/pdf/Anti-Ragging-Affidavit.pdf
21
Process for Filing Anti-Ragging Undertaking/Affidavit
• Students may visit the link: https://antiragging.in/ or https://antiragging.in/affidavit_registration_
disclaimer.html or https://antiragging.in/affidavit_ university_form.php to complete the online anti-ragging
affidavit to be filled in by the student/ parent/ guardian.
• After filling this form online, students will receive a confirmation email on their registered email address
with a reference number confirming their submission of the affidavit.
• The confirmation email should be forwarded to antiragging@snu.edu.in and a screenshot/ PDF of the
confirmation email should also be uploaded at the document upload section on the pre-registration portal.
• Students are subsequently required to upload the confirmation number, or a screenshot of their successful
filing of the affidavit, in order to be eligible to apply for accommodation in the hostels.
• Freshers and other students and members of faculty and staff must promptly bring any instance of ragging
to the notice of the authorities of the University.
4.2 Anti Ragging Squad
In accordance with regulations, Shiv Nadar IoE has constituted an Anti-Ragging Squad. The composition
and responsibilities of this squad has representation from various segments of the campus community to
maintain vigilance, oversight, and patrolling functions. The squad remains mobile, alert, and active at all
times. It does not include any outside representation.
Terms of Reference for ARS:
• The ARS shall take all measures which are necessary to prohibit and prevent ragging in Shiv Nadar IOE and
will perform duties as set out in the UGC Regulations.
• Primary role of ARS will be to maintain vigil, oversight, patrolling, and conduct surprise checks in the
hostels and other places vulnerable to incidents of ragging.
22
4.3 Disciplinary Committee
A Student Disciplinary Committee (SDC) has been constituted at Shiv Nadar IoE, which functions under the
Department of Student Affairs. The SDC is responsible for handling minor offences and serves as a first-level
mechanism to deal with student-related disciplinary cases. Apart from University authorities, the SDC also
has one member nominated from the Student Council, usually the Vice President.
Appeal Against a SDC Decision
A student awarded a punishment by the Student Disciplinary Committee shall have the right to file an appeal
before the Proctorial Board, in writing, within 10 days from receipt of the order of punishment by the SDC.
The appeal may be handwritten or printed but must be signed by the student themselves. The physical copy
as well as a copy by email should reach the Proctor (email ID: proctor@snu.edu.in) within the stipulated
period.
The Proctor, being the Chairperson of the Proctorial Board (PB), along with two other members of the PB
will consider the Appeal after calling for the records from the Student Disciplinary Committee. It will be at
the discretion of the Proctor, whether or not to hear the appellant student in person. The Proctor should
ideally decide the matter within 15 days from the date of receipt of the Appeal. In case an extension is
required, the Proctor should promulgate a speaking order, stipulating the number of additional days required
to come to a decision on the Appeal. This should be an exception, and in any case, all endeavour should be
made to come to a reasoned decision within no more than 30 days.
• The PB, while considering the appeal may entertain fresh evidence, provided it was not presented before the SDC,
when the matter was first heard.
• The PB may uphold the decision of the SDC, moderate the penalty or grant more severe punishment.
• The outcome of the Appeal is conveyed as a report to the Dean of Students and also to the Vice-Chancellor.
• Once decided, the decision of the PB on the Appeal shall be binding and there shall be no further appeal against
the decision.
4.4 Proctorial Board
The Proctor of Shiv Nadar IoE Deemed to be University shall be the Chairperson of the Proctorial Board (PB)
and will be responsible for handling major infractions and acts of indiscipline on campus. The PB will serve
as the second-level mechanism to deal with student-related disciplinary cases.
Appeal Against a PB decision
A student awarded a punishment by the Proctorial Board shall have the right to file an appeal before the
Vice-Chancellor in writing within 10 days from receipt of the order of punishment. The hard copy of the
appeal in writing, signed by the student should be submitted to the office of the Vice-Chancellor and a soft
copy of the appeal should also be mailed to the office of the Vice-Chancellor on email ID vc@snu.edu. in
within the stipulated period.
The Vice-Chancellor will consider the appeal after calling for the records from the Proctorial Board. It will be
at the discretion of the Vice-Chancellor to accord a hearing to the appellant student. The Vice- Chancellor
should normally decide the appeal within 15 days from the date of receipt of appeal. If an extension is
required to decide the appeal, a speaking order for such extension of time should be passed. However, all
endeavours shall be made to decide the Appeal within no more than 30 days.
23
• The Vice-Chancellor, while considering the appeal may entertain fresh evidence, provided it was not
presented before the PB, when the matter was first heard.
• The Vice-Chancellor may uphold the decision of the PB, moderate the penalty or direct more severe
punishment. The outcome of the Appeal will be conveyed to the PB and to the Dean of Students, who shall
thereafter convey it to the appellant student.
• There shall be no further appeal to the decision of the Vice-Chancellor. The decision of the Vice- Chancellor
shall be final.
4.5 Procedure of Complaint/ Enquiry and Punishment
• Chief sources of complaints include-Hostel, Security, Health Centre, Food and Amenities vendors, Faculty,
Staff, Parents and Students.
• The Hostel/ Security/ Faculty/ Staff/ Parents, and Students shall report to Member Secretary of the
Disciplinary Committee in writing through e-mail followed by Incident Report within 24 hours and without
losing any time from the time of the occurrence/ Information received.
4.6 Appeal for Suspension of Disciplinary Award on Special Consideration
Any student awarded punishment, other than Termination or Suspension from the University, may appeal for
having the punishment suspended for up to seven days for special family occasions. This is a privilege that is
allowed only once in an academic year.
a) Punishment by Student Disciplinary Committee: Appeal addressed to chair.dc@snu.edu.in
b) Punishment by Proctorial Board: Appeal addressed to proctor@snu.edu.in
24
4.7 Internal Complaints Committee
The Internal Complaints Committee (ICC) also called the ‘Gender Committee’, at Shiv Nadar IoE, has a policy
for the Prevention of Sexual Harassment (PoSH) on campus.
Shiv Nadar IoE is committed to providing a place of work and study, free of gender bias and sexual
harassment, intimidation or exploitation. It is expected that all students, faculty and staff will treat one
another and visitors with dignity and respect. All members of the Shiv Nadar IoE community, including
those who are in temporary or short-term positions and employed with third party vendors, are expected to
contribute towards ensuring that the workplace is free of gender and sexual harassment.
The responsibility of promoting gender sensitivity and taking action in cases of sexual harassment has
been vested with ICC. Reports of sexual harassment are taken seriously and dealt with promptly by the
ICC in accordance with the provisions of the University Grants Commission (Prevention, Prohibition and
Redressal of Sexual Harassment of women employees and students in higher educational institutions)
Regulations, 2015. The University has recently re-constituted the ICC w.e.f. 14 July 2025, as per the above
mentioned UGC Regulations, and the Government of India notification no. 14 of 2013, regarding ‘The
sexual harassment of women at workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act 2013’. The regulatory
framework of ICC is guided by UGC requirements as well as Shiv Nadar IoE’s Gender Policy.
All students are required to attend a mandatory sensitization session conducted by the ICC at Shiv Nadar
IoE. Club functionaries and members of student Council have to take these sessions before they assume
elected positions. The orientation seeks to educate participants regarding sexual consent, promote
understanding of an environment of cooperation and dialogue among members of the University, while
also making students aware of their rights and duties. The ICC and the University strongly believe in the
importance of fostering gender equity, and maintaining a campus free of sexual harassment to ensure that
our students have the best possible environment to pursue their goals.
Any aggrieved person (employees, students, third party vendors) may file a formal written complaint against
any incident of sexual harassment by email, to the Chairperson of the ICC at: gendercommittee@snu.edu.in
Shiv Nadar IoE Gender Policy:
https://snu.edu.in/home/mandatory-disclosure/gender-policy/
ICC Members list : https://snu.edu.in/site/assets/files/16490/notification__internal_
complaints_committee_14_july_2025.pdf?v=2
4.8 Students Grievance Redressal Cell (SGRC)
In consonance with the University Grants Commission (Redressal of Grievances of Students) Regulations,
2023, the Shiv Nadar IoE has constituted the SGRC. The objective is to provide opportunities for redressal
of certain grievances of students already enrolled in Shiv Nadar IoE, as well as those seeking admission
to Shiv Nadar IoE, and a mechanism thereto. The email ID for the grievances redressal is sgrc@snu.edu.in.
The students may register their concerns related to grievances to the mentioned email ID. The same will be
examined and addressed in the SGRC.
25
IMPORTANT EMAIL ID’S
Anti-Ragging Committee – antiragging@snu.edu.in
Dean of Students – dean.students@snu.edu.in
Deputy Dean of Student - deputydean.students@snu.edu.in
DSA Helpdesk – odshelpdesk@snu.edu.in
IT helpdesk – ithelpdesk@snu.edu.in
Disability Support Cell – disability.support@snu.edu.in
Disciplinary Committee – disciplinary.committee@snu.edu.in
Internal Complaint Committee (ICC) -gendercommittee@snu.edu.in
Proctorial Board – proctor@snu.edu.in
Students Grievances Redressal Committee – sgrc@snu.edu.in
Maintenance work in hostels – callbob@snu.edu.in
Matters related to academics– office.deanacademics@snu.edu.in
Dog related Issues- fetch@snu.edu.in with CC to Dean of Students and Anoop Kumar.
HCL Health Issues. @Anshu Narendra Paliwal with CC to @Dean of Students .
You may also scan the QR at the Health Centre to provide feedback directly to HCL Healthcare,
giving all relevant details.
Hostel Issues.-Your warden first, and in case you feel you are not getting a resolution,
you should write to deputydean.students@snu.edu.in with CC to @Dean of Students
Mess Issues - @Secretary of Food Affairs with CC to @Dean of Students
Campus Issues - @Campus Affairs Secretary with CC to @Dean of Students
VH Booking for Parents- @ODS Helpdesk giving all the details that they require, CC to @Karthika
Lost & Found - @ODS Helpdesk giving details as per the format.
Bullying or Harassment - First approach your Warden. CC @Dean of Students
Any Grievance of a personal nature that you feel cannot been addressed to the above,
write to @Students Grievances Redressal Committee
For Guidance and help in any matter you can also approach
@President Student Council .
26
5. OTHER SERVICES
Student ID card is an accountable document that earns rights and privileges, besides establishing
identity. Loss of identity card is a serious offence as it may lead to a student’s identity being
misused. Shiv Nadar IoE has an online process for applying for a duplicate identity card. The tab
for applying is active on SNU Links.Students must submit their physical ID cards to Admin office at
the time of graduating/finally leaving the University in order to obtain clearance.
5.1 Student ID Card
Process for applying Duplicate ID Card
1. Student can log into the ID card management system application with their NetID and submit a
request for a Duplicate ID Card.
2. Request will come to DSA for Approval.
3. Once DSA approves, the request will be routed to Finance Department. The student needs
to pay Rs 500/- for duplicate ID card to the finance team who will update the paid status in the
application. The approval by DSA is not automatic and repeat offenders may face the disciplinary
action.
4. The request will reach the administration team who will prepare the new ID card after payment
is confirmed by finance. When the card is ready for issue, admin will update status on the app and
the student will get an email notification for collecting ID card from admin department.
Note: In case of an emergency, if a student needs a temporary ID card, the same can be requested via
SNU links ‘ ID Card Management’ application. A temporary card will be automatically sent to student
email which would have a validity of 48hrs only. The student can take print out of that, paste a passport
sized photo and get it attested by their warden or DSA and use it for purposes of examination/entry and
exit to campus only. Only one temporary ID card will be issued in the entire tenure of a student.
27
5.2 Food on Campus
Dining Halls
The University campus is home to students from 28 States & UTs, and the cuisine available on the campus
reflects this diversity. Catering to the cultural and food preferences of students, the three large dining Halls
(DH 1, 2 & 3) provide healthy and varied fare. The dining areas adhere to the highest standards of hygiene
consciousness and are well furnished and fully equipped.
The students’ food committee under Secretary of Food Affairs participates in finalizing menu with vendors
and conducts audit of all food operations on the campus.
The dining halls provide vegetarian and non-vegetarian breakfast, lunch, evening snacks, and dinner as per
the published menu, as well as certain a-la-carte options. We accommodate requests for specific diets, such
as Jain and Vegan, as well as cater to individuals with specific allergies. A midnight meal is served till 2:00
AM every day for those who burn the midnight oil in various academic and extracurricular pursuits.
5.3 Courier Desk
Students can collect their online ordered package from the courier desk/racks in D Block.
5.4 Transport
University-chartered buses are available for students on the weekends on paid basis. The bus shuttles
between Noida GIP (Great India Place) and the University. The Student Transport Committee manages the
service, and the trips are planned on the recommendation of the committee.
For safe and secure personal cab bookings, students should book through the following University
authorized service providers.
• Mr. Mukesh - +919560435666 ( HBBS )
• Mr. Pankaj +91-99998 02256 ( Giriraj)
• Mr. Vikas + 91-9818600097 (Noida cabs)
Shiv Nadar IOE Internal Shuttle
A regular campus shuttle service runs every 20 minutes along routes as shown.
28
For Students Shuttle
Time Schedule Type Of Trans-
From To SN IoE Back port Pickup location
Shiv Nadar IoE Noida (Sec 18) 09:00 11:00 Sat - Sun Tempo Travel-
ler (20 Seater/ Near Foot Over Bridge near
Shiv Nadar IoE Noida (Sec 18) 18:45 19:45 Sat - Sun demand Indian Oil Petrol Pump
based)
Shiv Nadar IoE Pari chowk 12:00 14:00 Sat - Sun Tempo Travel- Bikanerwala near Pari Chowk
ler (20 Seater) (aqua line metro)
18:00
Shiv Nadar IoE Pari chowk Sat - Sun
29
Pari Chowk to Shiv Nadar University by Veer Akshardham to Shiv Nadar University
Sawarkar Chowk
5.5 Stay at Visitor’s Hostel for Parents of Shiv Nadar IoE students
Visitors Hostel is available for stay of parents of students, subject to availability and booking as per laid down
process, given below.
• The student must send a mail to odshelpdesk@snu.edu.in for booking VH in the specific name of person(s),
indicating relationship to sponsor student. Emails by guests themselves or those from a non-Shiv Nadar IOE
ID will not be entertained. The request for VH booking will be considered only for parents of the students and
accompanying close relatives.
The email should have following details for a VH room booking:
1. Name of Student
2. Roll Number of Student
3. Relationship of visitors with student
4. Number of visitors, names and attachment of government ID proof of each of the visitors
5. Reason for visiting
6. Dates on which the room is required (date of arrival and departure)
• Rates for rooms may be ascertained from the ODS help desk. Meals are available on a chargeable basis and
the payment should be made by guests at VH office.
• The admin department will confirm bookings via email as per availability. The confirmation email should be
shown to the authorities at VH office as and when requested. The same will be checked at visitor’s hostel by
the staff on duty. It is advisable that the students inform D Block security about arrival details of the parents to
make the process smoother. The security can facilitate pickup from Gate No.1 if required.
• Visitors Hostel booking should be made at least three working days prior to requirement. (Mon-Fri).
• Driver (if any) accompanying the visitors, can also be accommodated on a paid basis.
• Students are NOT allowed to enter Visitor’s Hostel and parents will not be permitted inside student hostels.
VH Reception Desk provides them with Guest Wi-Fi access.
• Parents would need to make their own travel arrangements to reach Shiv Nadar IOE. Self- driven cars need to
be parked at Parking 1.
• In case of any emergency, contact the D-Block Security Desk or dean.students@snu.edu.in.
30
6. CODE OF CONDUCT
In any organization or community, maintaining a respectful and inclusive environment is crucial
for fostering positive interactions and achieving shared goals. One key aspect of upholding such
standards is the implementation of a comprehensive policy for dealing with violations of the code
of conduct. We believe in reformative actions, as our endeavour is to encourage our students
to become responsible citizens. This policy serves as a guiding framework that outlines the
expectations for behaviour and establishes clear consequences for any breaches. By establishing
a policy that addresses violations in a fair and consistent manner, the institution can ensure
accountability, protect its members, and promote a culture of respect, professionalism, and mutual
understanding. In this policy document, we will explore the importance of such a policy and its
role in creating a safe and welcoming environment for all individuals involved.
Kindly refer to the “#ST 212 Policy for Dealing with violation of the Student Code of Conduct” in SNU
Links.
The Student Code of Conduct applies to any student enrolled in any credit course at Shiv Nadar IoE,
including exchange students.
6.1 Freedom with Responsibility
Shiv Nadar IoE, Delhi-NCR, trusts students to do what they think is best for them and for the
University, and believes in giving them the freedom and information to support their decisions.
In turn, the University expects students to demonstrate responsibility and self-discipline in their
conduct.
SNU Links. https://snulinks.snu.edu.in/snuPolicies/students/
6.2 Celebrating Diversity
Students come from diverse backgrounds, beliefs, religions, cultures, perspectives, gender, and
experiences. Inclusivity plays an extremely important role in the success of our community.
Discrimination based on physical appearance, gender, sex, caste, creed, colour, religion, region, or
culture is prohibited and if reported will be dealt under the provisions made in University Code of
Conduct.
6.3 Respect for Rule of Law and University Policies
• Students should not indulge in any activity that causes any obstruction to teaching, learning,
research, administration, and other bonafide activities in the University.
• No student should indulge in any activity, on or offline, that hurts or targets any other students,
faculty or staff personally.
• University’s rules and policies are to be followed strictly. All these policies are easily accessible
on the intranet, SNU Links. https://snulinks.snu.edu.in/snuPolicies/students/ and \
“#ST 212 Policy for Dealing with violation of the Student Code of Conduct” in SNU Links.
• Any student-organized activity on campus, whether indoors or outdoors, needs permission from
the Dean of Students at least three working days in advance. If any activity relating to academics
requires use of venues other than labs or classrooms, the admin helpdesk will need to be informed
in advance, to make necessary arrangements.
31
6.4 Zero Tolerance Offences:
Shiv Nadar IoE observes zero tolerance for offences as is detailed below:-
• No person who is a student of a University shall commit ragging, which includes but is not limited to
teasing, embarrassing, humiliating, assaulting and/or using criminal force or criminal intimidation, wrongfully
restraining, or confining or causing hurt and /or taking introduction. In dealing with the acts of ragging,
reference will be made to the definition of ragging as stipulated in Vishwa Jagriti Matter (1999) and the UGC
Regulation on Curbing the Menace of Ragging in Higher Educational Institutions, 2019.
• No persons shall cause sexual harassment at place of work, study place or extended study place and
every person is expected not to commit offences as is detailed in the Sexual Harassment of Women at
Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 and University Grants Commission (Prevention,
Prohibition, and Redressal of Sexual Harassment of Women Employees and Students in Higher Educational
Institutions) Regulation 2015.
• Procuring and/or Possessing and/or Consumption and/or Aiding and/or Selling of any narcotic drug or
psychotropic substances.
• Causing injury to the faculty, staff, administrative members of the University on or off-campus.
Penalties:
Penalties for offences classified under Zero Tolerance would follow the UGC Guidelines/Notifications,
including the judgment of the Supreme Court on the subject and violations thereof. These may also lead
to suspension and expulsion from University and legal action against the perpetrators, for which the
University will file an FIR, if desired. The University may also file a legal complaint if deemed necessary.
6.5 Hostel Expulsion
The students awarded the decision of ‘Hostel Expulsion’ by the internal disciplinary committees will be asked
to vacate the hostel with immediate effect and will be considered to be expelled from the hostel, for the
entire duration of the mentioned semester. Further, the hostel fees will have to be paid in full by them for
the entire mentioned semester; or, if they had paid the hostel fees, the hostel fees would not be refunded
by the university. The students who are awarded the decision of Hostel Expulsion, once they re-join and
resume the academic session and residential stay in their respective places, will remain under academic and
disciplinary probation for the duration of their remaining stay at the university. Any subsequent offence
would lead to serious punishment that could include termination from the university.
32
6.6 Suspension
Any student found guilty of serious or persistent violation of guidelines shall be temporarily barred from
attending classes, not allowed to stay inside hostels, barred from giving examinations, or participating in
any university activities. This is a form of punishment for violating regulations or engaging in any kind of
misconduct/indisciplined behaviour. The length of the suspension can vary based on the gravity of the
offence and the rules of the institution. The purpose of suspension is to serve as a deterrent and allow
the student to reflect on their actions and make positive changes. Most suspensions are temporary, giving
students time to improve their conduct and reintegrate into the university community after the period
awarded has passed. For more information, please refer to the Policy for dealing with violation of the
Student Code of Conduct.
6.7 Termination
Any student found guilty of persistent violation of guidelines, or of serious offences may be expelled
or terminated from the Shiv Nadar IoE. This would constitute permanent severance of the student’s
relationship with the Shiv Nadar IoE. For more information, please refer to the policy for dealing with
violation of the Student Code of Conduct.
33
7. HOSTEL RULES
These rules apply to ALL residents who are allotted rooms in the student hostels. No student will
be allowed to stay in the hostel unless enrolled in courses. The first point of contact for all hostel-
related issues is the Hostel Warden. Shiv Nadar IoE is a fully residential campus and all student
enrolled at the University except PhD scholars have to stay on the campus for the duration of their
respective programs.
Section A
A.1 Occupancy of Hostel Rooms
Twin sharing/ single occupancy rooms are available in the hostels, which shall be allotted to
students by the Hostel Administration. Single rooms will not be allotted to UG first year students.
Residents are required to carry out the check- in/ check-out formalities personally on the
prescribed format available with the warden when occupying or vacating their rooms. Wardens
will assist in the process. The process of allocation of hostel accommodation shall be as decided by
the University and the type of room allotted will be subject to availability.
A.2 Duration of Different Programs and Stay at the Hostel
• Undergraduate Programs -B.Tech., B.Sc., B.A., minimum of 6 full semesters to maximum of 12
full semesters, ideally completed in 8 full semesters.
• Master’s Programs - M.Tech., M.Sc., M.A., four full semesters.
• Ph.D. Program, eight to ten full semesters (as per the residency requirements of the particular
program). Accommodation will not be provided after completion of five years of the program.
1. Any student who needs to stay beyond the duration of their program will have to seek
permission from the Dean of Students for extension, which shall be considered subject to the
availability of rooms.
2. All students have to pay their hostel fees as directed by the Finance Department. The Living
Expenses which include Hostel, Mess and Laundry are paid yearly/semester wise depending on
the policy. The academic year runs from August to May with a Winter Break during December.
3. There is a Summer Semester during June and July for which charges are over and above the
living expenses done for the academic year. There is a process in place for securing a bed during
summer semester. Student should apply to the Dean Students office at least two weeks in advance
for the same with the approval from the concerned department.
4. Students are permitted to reside in a hostel on the condition that they rigorously adhere to the
hostel rules and university code of conduct. Ignorance of rules will not be accepted as an excuse
for violation.
5. The university administration may deny accommodation to any resident/student who violates
the hostel rules or whose presence is likely to disturb the peace and tranquillity of hostels.
Violation of hostel rules will make the student liable to disciplinary action which may include
permanent expulsion from the hostel.
34
Section B
B.1 General Rules and Regulations
1. Students are required to stay in their allotted rooms only. Changing of the allotted rooms
is not allowed unless approval is obtained from the Deputy Dean of Students, Head Hostel
Administration in writing.
2. Restricted Hostel Hours (RHH) will apply for first-year UG students. Physical/ biometric
attendance will be taken at their hostel reception from 11:30 PM to 12:00 AM. They are expected
to return to their hostels before 11:30 PM. Any violation will result in disciplinary action.
3. Students are not allowed to leave the campus before 06:00 AM and after 09:00 PM on
weekdays. Students who leave campus in the day are required to return to the campus premises
before 09:00 PM on all days, unless they have an approved night pass.
4. Students are not allowed to keep speakers in the hostel / University or play loud music on
hostel / campus. Speakers of any size or kind found with any student / scholar will be confiscated
and not returned. Earphones must be used for music, movies, games, or online classes in rooms or
common areas so as not to disturb others.
5. Students are not permitted to visit staff or faculty members residing in campus housing. Wards
of the University staff/ faculty will be permitted to visit their homes on campus only on weekends/
festivals with due authorisation from Deputy Dean of Students, Head Hostel Administration.
6. Possession or consumption of alcohol, cigarettes, and substances of abuse is strictly prohibited
on campus. Aiding, abetting, consumption, and possession of any such material and activities
are liable to attract strict disciplinary action and may lead to suspension / termination from the
University.
7. Students must not misuse sports courts or fields, or trespass into unauthorised areas. Defaulters
may face disciplinary action.
8. During a regular semester, the university administration can ask any Student / Scholar to change
room / hostel under circumstances which are in line with the University functioning and deemed
necessary by the authorities.
9. Students are required to always carry their identity card and produce it on demand to any
authorized person. Students will not be allowed to move in or out of campus without a physical ID
card.
10. Students who are not mapped to any hostel will be required to make an entry in the register at
the reception and their ID will be deposited at the reception for the duration of their stay.
11. Tailgating at the turnstile (hostel / main gate) will be viewed seriously and may attract
disciplinary action.
12. Students are required to cooperate fully with the authorities to ensure security and shall not
argue or misbehave with security personnel.
35
13. The warden or any authorized member can inspect any student’s room at any time, in presence
of at least one Shiv Nadar IoE student.
14. Students are not allowed to put up notices or posters in the hostel without the warden’s
permission.
15. Students are expected to ensure cleanliness of their rooms and to help maintain the general
upkeep of the hostel premises.
16. Electrical Appliance Usage Policy in Hostel Rooms
The electrical wiring and fittings in hostel rooms are not designed to support heavy electrical
loads. Use of unauthorized electrical appliances poses a risk of fire and endangers the safety of the
campus community. Therefore, to ensure safety and prevent any hazards, the use of the following
electrical appliances is strictly prohibited:
• Refrigerator
• Air Cooler
• Induction Cooktop
• Appliances with heating elements (e.g., Room Heaters, Electric Blankets, Heating Pads)
• Pedestal Fans
• Immersion Rods
Permitted Appliances (Below 500 Watts Only):
• Table fan 12inches or less
• Hair Dryer
• Trimmer
• Electric Iron
• Electric Kettle (strictly for medical use only)
Note: The electric kettle is allowed only for medical purposes. If it is found being used for cooking
or any other purpose, it will be confiscated immediately.
Policy on Unauthorized Appliances:
• Any electrical equipment not provided by the hostel or not listed above, if required for medical
or special needs, must have prior written approval from the Head of Hostel Administration.
• Unauthorized items found in the rooms will be confiscated and not returned.
• Repeat violations may result in additional penalties as deemed appropriate by the Hostel
Administration.
This policy is in place to ensure the safety and wellbeing of all residents, and your cooperation is
expected.
36
17. The items confiscated at the hostel, gate or anywhere on the campus will not be returned.
18. Mess utensils are not supposed to be taken out of the dining halls.
19. Any celebrations such as birthday celebrations/any parties are not allowed in hostel premises.
Please use any location outside the hostel premises for the same and be mindful to clear up any
litter.
20. Cooking is not allowed inside the hostel rooms / premises, except in the hostel pantries.
Possession of cookware other than a pan is not permitted.
21. Pets are not allowed inside the hostel. Students are not permitted to feed any animals on
campus, including dogs. Students found feeding dogs or encouraging their entry into hostels/
dining halls/food court/academic spaces will be liable for a fine and disciplinary action.
22. Students are responsible for their belongings. They have been provided with dedicated
lockable rooms and storage spaces in the room. They are required to always keep their belongings
under lock and key. The University is not responsible for the theft of any personal belongings. The
university authority will not be responsible for any unattended belongings in or outside the hostel
premises or common areas. Avoid bringing expensive items / jewellery / cash to the campus.
23. All hostel rules apply uniformly to all residents. Ph.D. scholars, as senior residents, are
expected to be role models. For room allocation, Ph.D. scholars must use their University Student
Roll numbers when registering on HMS, even if they have dual/employee IDs. Hostel rules are
outlined in detail in the Policy Document.
B.2 Action against Latecomers
Undergraduate students must adhere to the rules for campus entry and exit. Students who leave
campus must return before 9:00 PM on all days, except in cases where permission has been taken
for late entry. Students coming late will have their details recorded at the University gate by
Security, which will be shared the next day with the Department of Student Affairs. Late comers
will receive a warning in the first instance. Repeat offenders may have their gate pass suspended
and their parents will be intimated, in addition to facing further disciplinary action/fine.
B.3 Exiting the Campus
1. UG students cannot leave campus without permission, which is to be applied for online using
the Digii campus app. The app has separate modules for day out and night out. Day out does not
require approval, but night out needs parental approval for UG and RM students. PG, MBA, and
Ph.D. students do not need parental approval for night out movement. All students/scholars must
enter their particulars in the hostel register at the reception when going on a night out and close it
upon return.
2. Students who are unable to return on the pre-decided date should extend their gatepass by
following the prescribed process available on the DigiiCampus well before 8:30 pm and inform
their respective wardens at least 3 hours in advance.
37
3. The Digii campus process will be followed even for university events like competitions or sports.
Proper protocol must be followed, and permits are a privilege, not a right. Students leaving the
hostel without permission shall be deemed missing, and parents, guardians, or police may be
informed by the Office of DSA.
4. Entry to the university campus is regulated. Students must cooperate with university staff and
present their physical IDs when asked. Compliance with security regulations, including maintaining
certain records, is mandatory. The Digii campus Exit/Entry system is integrated with turnstiles
and biometrics. Students under disciplinary action or otherwise, may have their biometric blocked
upon written instructions from the DSA.
B.4 On First Arrival (Every Year)
1. All students must provide their medical information regarding allergies, vaccinations, ailments,
and special medical needs to the DSA office with a copy to their hostel warden for emergency
care.
2. Upon check-in, students must thoroughly inspect their room and its inventory.
3. In case of damage during check-in, students must email the warden and obtain acknowledgment
of their complaint for proof. Without this proof, they are responsible for penalties or fines upon
leaving the hostel.
4. Any damages or losses will be noted during check out and a commensurate fine will be imposed.
5. Students must also complete the Info Form provided by the warden during check-in.
B.5 Vacation Period
1. Students must vacate their rooms and take all belongings with them in the summer break(May-
July). A cloakroom managed by the student council may be provided. Any student willing to avail
this facility should follow the process and protocols mentioned in an advisory given by the Student
Council. The University will not be responsible for any loss or damage to the articles/baggage left
behind.
2. To avail the hostel accommodation for research/academic/internship or any other official work
during vacations (December-January / May-August), students need permission from the Dean of
Students, approved by faculty sponsors/advisor and department heads. They must fill out forms at
the DSA office and pay applicable fees according to University policies. Students with low CGPA
or disciplinary record will not be permitted to stay back on campus.
B.6 Visitors at the Hostel
Entry of the visitors in hostel will be restricted up to the designated areas in hostel reception
lobby. The visitors cannot stay beyond 5:00 PM on campus unless otherwise approved by the
Dean of Students. Only parents whose information was registered with the university at the time
of admission will be permitted to remain on campus until 9 p.m., with prior notification to the
respective warden. Any student found to have visitor/s in their room or beyond the designated
area shall be liable to disciplinary action to the extent of hostel expulsion.
38
B.7 Hostel Inventory and Loss of/Damage to Hostel/University Property
1. Students must carefully check hostel room inventory during check-in and handover the rooms
in the same condition during check out. They’re responsible for movable items like mattresses,
curtain rods, lights, fans, locks, etc., during the regular semester.
2. In case of intentional/ unintentional damage to any portion of the hostel buildings, furniture,
equipment, or other University property, the loss shall be recovered from the person/s identified
as the cause of such damage. However, if the persons responsible for the damage cannot be
identified, the cost of repairing the damage will be assessed and distributed equally amongst
all the inmates of that particular floor / hostel or group of inmates/students of that wing of the
hostel, found responsible for the damage and as deemed fit by the authorities.
B.8 Use of Personal Vehicles
1. Students may use their personal bicycles for movement around the campus. These bicycles are
the responsibility of the students and are to be parked in an orderly manner in the designated
bicycle parking spaces. Students should not park their bicycles in such a way that blocks access
to common passages or inconveniences others in any way. A fine of Rs. 50 per instance may be
imposed on owners of bicycles found wrongly parked. Students are required to lock and secure
their bicycles to prevent their unauthorised use by others.
2. UG students are not permitted to bring/use any two or four-wheelers or any other form of
motorized transport on campus. Self-driven vehicles may be permitted on campus in exceptional
case after approval by Dean of Students. The parking duration and location on campus will be
specified in the approved email.
3. PG/Ph.D. students may bring their personal vehicles for the purpose of moving in and out of
the campus, but not for use inside the campus. Such students must seek specific prior permission
from the Dean of Students for bringing personal vehicles to the campus, providing proof of
ownership of the vehicle, valid driving licence, insurance, and any other relevant documents
asked for. The vehicles will remain the responsibility of the students and Shiv Nadar IoE will not
be responsible for their safety. Besides incurring disciplinary consequences, any misuse of private
vehicles, or rash driving, may result in the vehicle being impounded and the student may be
banned from bringing it to campus.
4. Students are not permitted to park any motorized vehicles in or around the hostel or academic
blocks, or elsewhere. Vehicles of those PG and PhD students, who have been granted permission
to keep them on campus, may only be parked in the designated parking areas, notified by DSA
from time to time. Vehicles found parked elsewhere are liable to be impounded and will attract a
fine of Rs. 500 in the first instance. Repeat offenders will be liable for disciplinary consequences,
besides the permission to keep the vehicle being withdrawn.
5. Bicycles found to be lying unused/ abandoned at various spaces on campus for a prolonged
period will be collected by the administration and kept at a suitable location. Unclaimed bicycles
will be disposed of as scrap, after giving reasonable notice of 30 days for prospective claimants to
retrieve them.
39
8. COMMUNICATION
WITHIN HOSTELS
Hostel Maintenance Complaints
There is a dedicated team of wardens to ensure your safety and comfort in the hostels. For all hostel
related issues please reach out to your wardens.
Suggested Format – Complaints
To: (for example Call bob) CC: Warden
Subject: Light Not Working | Hostel 1A Room 23 Dear Sir/Ma’am
The light in my room is not working. Hostel 1A Room 23. Kindly have the same repaired. I will be available
in my room from to time.
Thank you,
Regards
<STUDENT NAME>
<COURSE NAME>
<STUDENT ID NUMBER>
40
9. INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY & ONLINE/SNU LINKS
RESOURCES
The computing resources at Shiv Nadar IoE support the educational, instructional, research and
administrative activities of the University. As users of these services and facilities, students have access to
valuable University resources, sensitive data, and internal and external networks.
The major services provided by the Information Technology department are:
• Messaging (email) service – Official University Gmail (Google Workspace for Education) with 20 GB
storage, integrated with tools like Google Classroom, Calendar, Keep, etc.
• Microsoft 365 Productivity tools with AI functionality - Free access to full desktop apps (Word, Excel,
PowerPoint, Outlook), OneDrive (1 TB), Teams, and Microsoft Copilot.
• Campus Connectivity – Internet Connectivity (Wi-Fi / LAN)
• Collaboration Platforms for Online Classes like MS Teams, Google Meet, etc.
• University ERP, Mobile App, and associated applications
• Biometric Access control & Student Attendance Recording System
• Digii Campus App – Gate Pass Management, SAGEs
• High Performance Computing Cluster
University Single Sign on User Account (required for accessing various computing resources) and Self-
service portal for user account management.
• Blackboard - Learning Management System
• Other Computing & Lab infrastructure
How you can get IT Support
The IT Team has deployed Service Management and Customer Service suite for ticketing, workflow
automation, and notifications, and can be reached through:
Email: ithelpdesk@snu.edu.in
Walk-in: IT Bay E-Wing, 2nd Floor (E 301)
Phone: +91-120-7170105
(During University Working Hours)
41
9.1 University Single Sign-On (NetID)
The University SSO login ID (NetID) can be used for connecting to Wi-Fi, accessing LAB resources,
and authenticating various applications like University ERP, Blackboard, Student Attendance
portal, Student Payment Centre, etc.
Please click here for University Single Sign On (Net ID) Password Setup and to update personal
contact details on Microsoft Office Portal.
** Please ensure that you add your personal email address and mobile number to the Microsoft
Office Portal during the setup of your University SSO (Net ID) & Password. This is important so
that in the future, you can reset your password independently if you forget it.
Please follow these simple Do’s and Don’ts when accessing the IT resources:
Do not use another user’s account (Net ID or email ID) or attempt to capture or guess other user’s
passwords.
• You can use your Net ID only on your own device(s).
• Sharing of Net ID credentials among students, faculty or staff is not permissible.
• The connectivity provided in the Labs (through wired LAN) is only meant for the lab systems
and is not to be used for connecting individual devices (Laptops).
• For personal devices, a genuine Operating System & Antivirus should be used. You are advised
to keep all critical patches always updated on your device(s).
Please note:
• Personal devices should support 5GHz band for stable Wireless Connectivity across the
Campus.
• It is highly recommended that all your devices support Wi-Fi 6 standards & please note the
device compatibility below Wi-Fi 5 standards may face problem in connecting to the Campus
network.
• IoT devices (Alexa, Echo , Google Home, Bixby, Speakers, etc) that cannot authenticate 802.1x
standard, will not be able to connect to the University network.
For a more stable connectivity with less latency, you may use wired connectivity (where feasible).
Please ensure you carry a Cat6 patch cable to utilize the same.
Email Services
Email services are provided to all students. Students should use only the official University email
address for all communication with the University. Users need to abide by and comply with the
University’s policies on the acceptable use of electronic services.
The following are strictly prohibited:
• Sending spam, chain letters, or any other type of unauthorized widespread distribution of
unsolicited mail.
• Creation and use of a false or alias email address to impersonate another member or send
fraudulent communications.
• Intentional and unauthorized access to another individual’s email account or group email
addresses.
For details, please visit the Student Policy section on SNU Links. Any violation or abuse of the
University’s IT or email service should be reported to: ithelpdesk@snu.edu.in
Note: Violation of the University’s IT policies and repeated offences shall be regarded as cause for
disciplinary action.
42
Shiv Nadar University Mobile App
Students are advised to download the Shiv Nadar IoE mobile app, which is available for download
on Google Play store and Apple App Store. It will soon enable students to find a one-click solution
for feedback/queries/complain s regarding academic and non- academic issues.
Features available on the app:
• Academic Calendar
• Blackboard
• Campus, Campus life and programs offered
• Campus news
• Campus map
• Dining Halls Menu
• Sports news and events
• Sports Slot booking
• Information on Research Programs, International Partnerships, Career Development Centre.
Additional Information/Services available with University App Login:
• Clubs and Societies – communication, events & notifications
• Transport Pooling
• Helpdesk – can be used for raising IT & Hostel Maintenance related tickets/request.
• Lost & found tracking
• Timetable & Student Class Attendance Summary
• SOS feature to make emergency calls
Kindly download the app from Google Play / Apple app store.
Digii Campus Mobile App
Students can download the DigiiCampus app, available on Google Play Store and Apple App Store.
The App is used for:
• Campus Entry/Exit process
• Student Information Booths for Academics, General, Mess, Activities, Events, News.
• Student Academic Guidance Experts (SAGEs)
9.2 Student Policies
Students need to check the various policies as applicable to them on SNU LINKS in the Student
Policies Section.
https://snulinks.snu.edu.in/snuPolicies/students/
43
9.3 Student Payment Center
Students are advised to check the student payment center regularly for any payment dues. One
can also access records of past payments on the portal.
9.4 Scholarships
Students are eligible for various scholarships. Please refer to the SN IoE website for details related
to the same.
Educational Loan
The link https://snuadmissions.com/admission_info_2025.php will provide the various
financial institution details.
Application for Financial Assistance:
Students Seeking financial assistance may apply to the DSA office. Such cases will only be
considered when supported with complete documentary evidence of financial distress.
9.5 Certificate Issuance System(CIS)
Before giving the university/institution address for any government or private purpose, students
must get permission from the Office of the Registrar. The Office of the Registrar has the authority
to issue any required certificate to any outside agency.
Please visit the Shiv Nadar IoE Link page to apply. For any Certificate (as applicable) through the
Certificate Issuance System (CIS).
The link for CIS is: https://cgs.webapps.snu.edu.in
Note: Formats for all types of certificates are given. You may contact the Office of the Registrar
(D012) for customization of any other type of certificate, which is not available in CIS. For any
queries, write to: registraroffice@snu.edu.in.
44
10.UNDERGRADUATE DEGREE REQUIREMENTS
The paragraphs below provide a brief overview of the degree requirements and academic policies.
The details for the UG programmes are available in the UG Handbook. The details for each
Master’s and PhD programs are available at the respective department’s webpages. The academic
policies can be accessed under “Student Policy” on SNU links.
To earn an undergraduate degree (major) at the Shiv Nadar IoE, a student must complete the
credit requirements as applicable for the opted major. Students must meet the major credits
requirements and the University-level requirements in the Core Common Curriculum (CCC) and
University-Wide Electives (UWE) categories. The total credits for each major, including CCC and
UWE, are at least 150 but may be higher. (For instance, all B.Tech. programs require at least 160
credits).
A total of 42 credits in CCC and UWE courses must be earned by the student, with a minimum of
18 credits in each of the CCC and UWE categories. The remaining six credits are in the floating
category and can be earned from the Major Elective, UWE, and CCC categories.
For the Class of 2029 and onwards, a student must earn 40 credits from CCC and UWE courses,
with a minimum of 16 credits from each category. The remaining eight credits are in the floating
category and can be earned from the UWE and CCC categories. Further, for the Class of 2029
and onwards, a student must complete credit requirements ranging from 160 to 163 to graduate
across all undergraduate programs.
Finally, a student must have a final CGPA of at least 5.00 out of 10.00 to graduate.
Every programme has an Undergraduate (UG) Advisor. The UG Advisor is the primary point
of contact for any advice on academic matters. In the case of the School of Management and
Entrepreneurship, this role is overseen by the Program Chair.
The Undergraduate Handbook provides a quick reference for students on academic matters that
govern all the UG programs at the University. The detailed policies can be accessed under ‘Student
Policy’ on the SNU links.
Credits:
At the University, one credit is equivalent to 30 notional learning hours. Notional learning hours
include learning inside and outside the classroom, excluding self-study time. One credit requires
a student to be engaged in one hour per week of classroom teaching and one hour per week of
outside classroom learning, or two hours per week of practical classes, or three hours per week of
experiential learning over a semester.
The recommended number of credits per semester to meet the degree requirements in a time-
bound manner at the University is 18-22 credits. Students can enroll for a maximum of 25 credits
per semester.
45
Grades
At the completion of the credit course, every student who has registered for that course
shall be awarded a letter grade by the faculty. Each letter grade has an associated number of
grade points:
Grade Grade Points
A 10
A- 9
B 8
B- 7
C 6
C- 5
D 4
E 2
F 0
F* 0 (Attendance Less than 75%)
To successfully complete a course, a student needs to get at least the minimum passing grade
of D in that course. The Cumulative Grade Point Average (CGPA) is the weighted grade point
average of all credit courses completed by the student up to that point. An illustration is
given below:
Credits Grade
Course W 5 A
Course X 4 B-
Course Y 4 D
Course Z 3 C
CGPA = (5×10+4×7+4×4+3×6) / (5+4+4+3) = 112/16 = 7.00 out of 10.00.
An undergraduate student who fails to maintain a CGPA of at least 5.00 will be placed on
Academic Probation.
If the CGPA of a student fall below 4.00 at any time, from the end of the second semester
onwards, the student will receive a letter of discontinuation from the University and will not
be allowed to continue in the program. The student will be deregistered from the University.
Duration:
Given the way the programs are structured, an ideal student is expected to graduate within
four years or eight full semesters. However, the maximum permissible time to complete all
the degree requirements is within six years of their registration at the University.
`Full semester’ refers to the Spring (January to May) and Monsoon (August to December)
semesters.
46
Master’s Degree Requirements
To earn a Master’s degree in courses. Major core courses
a specific programme from are to be taken by all students
the University, a student must registered in the programme.
complete the requirements as The major elective courses are
prescribed by the programme. choice-based and are offered by
The requirements may consist the department for students to
of a mix of major core and choose from to fulfil their credit
major elective courses. Several requirements.
programmes may also require Detailed course information
completion of a project/ and degree requirements shall
thesis/internships for degree be available from the individual
completion. The total credit department/school. The
requirements for graduation program’s Postgraduate (PG)
would vary depending on Advisor or Program Chair shall
the programme of study. The be available to provide more
department shall prescribe the information and guide students.
number of credits required from
major core and major elective
The academic regulations for the Master’s degree
programme are available in
SNU Links: https://snulinks.snu.edu.in/snuPolicies/
Academics/Masters/
47
Doctoral Programs:
The University’s Ph.D. The academic regulation for the
program regulations define the doctoral program, along with
academic requirements, rules other pertinent information is
and regulations for obtaining available on
a Doctoral degree. Every
student is required to complete
the coursework as per their SNU Links: https://snulinks.snu.edu.in/
programme requirements. snuPolicies/Academics/DoctoralStudies/
PoliciesForms/
48
Attendance Policy for UG
1. Attendance is mandatory for all courses.
2. Attendance for a class is marked by the faculty member (course instructor).
3. All undergraduate students at the University are expected to be present for all of the scheduled
classes. For whatever reason (personal or official), a shortfall of no more than 25% is permitted on
each course.
4. The Office of the Dean of Academics monitors fulfilment of the minimum attendance
requirement.
5. The UG Handbook provides the detailed attendance requirements. The policy on student
attendance requirements can be accessed on SNU Links.
11.OPPORTUNITIES FOR UNDERGRADUATE
RESEARCH (OUR)
The OUR program at the University gives students hands-on experience in conducting research and
independent work under faculty supervision. Through the program, students develop a foundational
understanding of how research is conducted in their disciplines, learn about possible resources and the
way to utilize them as well as how to interpret research outcomes. This program has paved the way for
students to learn by discovery, has enabled greater student-faculty interaction and expanded the level
of research activity on campus; while also helping to identify and train potential candidates for the
University’s graduate programs.
Visit for details: https://our.webapps.snu.edu.in/public/
49
12. STUDENT MOBILITY AND EXCHANGE PROGRAM
The Student Mobility and Exchange Program is designed to provide students with international
academic exposure and cultural immersion. The Office of Research and Partnerships manages the
program at the university, which oversees all aspects of the semester abroad, including academic
planning, logistics, and student support.
Typically, outbound mobility and exchange program students spend one semester studying abroad
at a partner university. The Office of Research and Partnerships manages the semester in close
collaboration with the partner institution.
Before departure, students attend pre-departure orientation sessions that cover academic
expectations, cultural norms, and logistical details, such as visa requirements and housing
arrangements.
Once abroad, students are supported by the partner institution’s international office and the
Shiv Nadar IoE office. The Office of Research and Partnerships monitors the students’ academic
progress to ensure that they meet their home institution’s academic requirements.
Regular check-ins and assessments are conducted throughout the semester to ensure that
students are making progress toward their academic goals.
At its essence, the outbound mobility and exchange program at Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence
is a comprehensive program that provides students with a valuable international experience while
ensuring they receive the necessary support to succeed academically and personally during their
semester abroad.
Students with poor academic or disciplinary record will not be considered under this program.
Inbound: Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence welcomes a host of diverse students from our
globalized network of partner universities. Our world-class facilities attract learners from
around the world to pursue life-changing educational experiences at our university. Periods
of engagement traverse from one semester to full-year programs. Our academic programs
offer flexibility and unique skill-building experiences – unparalleled by other educational
institutions.
Outbound: Our outbound mobility program provides students with the opportunity to
study specialized courses at foreign universities. Periods of engagement traverse from
one semester to full-year programs, with options for flexibility. Curated with the aim of
providing life-changing experiences for learners, the program deepens one’s understanding
of diverse cultures and people.
To learn more, contact international.office@snu.edu.in
50
Note: Hostel fees are a part of Annual Fees. If a student is registered for a semester and does
not have a year/semester drop, they will be charged the full Tuition and Hostel Fee whether
the student stays or not, as we are a fully residential campus. The same applies to the final-year
students pursuing an internship next semester. The university will not be refunding them the
hostel fees as per policy. Mess and Laundry fees are exempted for certain cases after an approval
from the Dean of Research and Partnerships for Masters/PhD students and Dean of Students for
UG students.
Mess & Laundry Fees Waiver
Mess & laundry fees are waived for students who participate in off-campus internships or external
projects as part of their academic curriculum and are selected for Outbound Mobility or exchange
programmes with partner universities in their final year at Shiv Nadar IoE. The waiver is valid for
the duration of the programme or as specified by the Dean of Students. Hostel fees are not waived
except in cases where a student will be away on exchange for the entire academic year. In such
cases, once approved by the Dean of students, no hostel accommodation will be allotted to the
student.
For waiver of mess and laundry fees student must apply on the prescribed form available in
DSA office to the Department at least 15 days in advance of the program. Once recommended
by the HOD, approval will be waiver accorded by Dean of Students and forwarded to Finance
Department, with intimation to Dean of Academics and the Career Department.
Once approved, the waiver of food and laundry charges will be applied to the student’s account
for the duration of the programme. Students are required to promptly notify the DSA office of any
changes or modifications to the programme to ensure that the waiver is adjusted accordingly.
All students moving off the campus for internships must inform the Careers Development Centre
(CDC) team. cdc@snu.edu.in giving full details with dates, in order to be considered for waiver of
mess and laundry fees.
Students in their final year who have completed their credits and wish to leave campus and be
exempted from paying mess and laundry fees, must obtain approval from Dean of Academics,
prior to applying for the fee waiver as above.
51
13.LIBRARY ONLINE PUBLIC ACCESS CATALOGUE
The Shiv Nadar IoE Central Library, with its regal ship-like design, is one of the most frequented
locations on campus. The centrally air-conditioned library provides students and faculty with an
extensive collection of books, scientific and technical journals, and electronic reference materials
for academic and research purposes. The library is comprised of numerous reference, circulation,
audiovisual, and periodical sections, as well as e-journals, thesis and dissertations, and the
repository.
PG/ research UG
Patrons Category
Scholars Students
Entitlement Books 10 Books 5
Loan duration days 30 days 15
Overdue
Overdue charges Rs. 2/- per day after loan period
Charges/Fine
No. of library
RFID Based one university ID card
cards
Facilities/Services:
1. Self-Book issue/ Return kiosk.
2. Dedicated Rooms for PG/ Ph. D Students.
3. Study Rooms for UG/PG/Ph. D Students.
4. 24/7 Room for All Users.
5. Library helpdesk for all users’ queries.
6. Reprography Services (Printing & Scanning).
7. Shiv Nadar IoE Library Homepage
( https://library.snu.edu.in/)
8. Shiv Nadar IoE Library Institutional Repository
(http://dspace.snu.edu.in:8080/jspui/)
Library circulation:
• Patron should have their University ID Cards. It also works as their library card.
• Students can borrow a maximum of two books in a day
• Books can be re-issued twice
Library Rules:
• Students must produce their ID card to enter the library.
• Talking on mobile phones inside the library is strictly prohibited
• Consumption of food & beverages is not allowed inside the library
• Playing games and watching movies are not allowed in the library
• Library Timings: 9 AM to 12 AM. (Monday to Sunday) (Monday to Sunday).
• Indulging in act or behaviour that amounts to PDA is not allowed.
For more details, please get in touch with the library helpdesk on the ground floor of E block, visit
the website library.snu.edu.in, or write to libraryhelpdesk@snu.edu.in.
Please also watch out for the latest library use instructions on campus-wide emails.
52
14. ALUMNI RELATIONS OFFICE
The Alumni Relations Office is the connecting thread between the University and its graduates,
helping alumni stay engaged, informed, and involved.
From sharing opportunities and achievements to creating spaces for mentorship and collaboration,
the Office also helps current students benefit from the strength of our alumni network.
The Alumni Relations Office aims to work closely with alumni to build long-term, meaningful
relationships that benefit both the individual and the institution. By staying connected and
contributing in various ways, alumni help Shiv Nadar IoE grow as a centre of academic excellence
- both nationally and globally. These ongoing collaborations strengthen the University’s vision of
becoming a leading institution driven by innovation, impact, and community.
We are proud to have an ever-growing global community of over 5,000 alumni.
Our alumni engagement initiatives include:
• Alumni chapter meets in Delhi NCR, Bangalore, Chennai, Hyderabad, and Mumbai–Pune, USA
and Europe
• Annual Alumni Reunions
• Alumni Sessions - Alumni Talks, Mentorship Programs, Mock Interviews, Placement and
Higher Education Preparedness, Webinars
• Alumni Engagement with Students - Freshers batch interaction, Leadership Conclave,
Admission Process, job and internship offers for students
• Alumni Participation in Key Events - Breeze, TEDx, E-Summit, Convocation, AIC events,
Admission Info Sessions, Session Moderation, HCL events
• Graduating Class Engagement - Office bearer elections for Alumni Association and Oath-
taking ceremonies
• Explore our Alumni Magazine for inspiring journeys from our alumni. Read here
Important Guidelines for Students on Alumni Interaction
• Students are strictly prohibited from bringing alumni into hostel rooms. Violation of this rule
may lead to disciplinary action.
• During your time as a student - or even after graduating - you are not permitted to enter the
Visitor’s Hostel in the company of an alumnus or engage in any activities deemed restricted in
relation to alumni.
For further information or clarification, contact the Alumni Relations Office at
alumnirelations@snu.edu.in
53
Alumni Card and Conduct
The Shiv Nadar IoE Alumni ID Card is a privilege extended to graduates of the University.
However, any student or alumnus found guilty of misconduct or inappropriate behaviour, as
determined by the Office of the Dean of Student Affairs (DSA) and the Alumni Relations Office,
may face disciplinary action, which can include having their Alumni ID card blocked.
If the ‘Alumni Card Blocked’ status is awarded by the internal disciplinary committees:
• The individual’s alumni membership will be suspended
• The Alumni ID card will be rendered invalid and unusable
• The individual will be blacklisted, barred from entering University grounds, and prohibited
from attending official University events
The DSA and the Alumni Relations Office reserve the right to take such action based on
reasonable grounds and evidence of misconduct. This applies to current students (where
applicable) and all alumni, in order to maintain the integrity and safety of the University
community.
Note: Alumni who wish to visit the campus are required to email the Alumni Relations Office
at alumnirelations@snu.edu.in at least two working days in advance. The email should clearly
mention the reason for the visit.
Stay Connected:
Instagram: @alumnirelations_snu
Facebook: Aro Snu (Alumni Relations Snu)
Email: alumnirelations@snu.edu.in
54
OFFICES AND SERVICES - DEPARTMENT OF STUDENT AFFAIRS
Sno Name Designation Email ID Ext.no
1 Brig Steve Ismail (Retd.) Dean of Students dean.students@snu.edu.in 252
2 Col Pratik Saxena (Retd.) Deputy Dean of Students deputydean.students@snu.edu.in 470
Associate Director & Head of
3 Dr Anshu Paliwal anshu.paliwal@snu.edu.in 655
Student Life
4 Dr Jitendra Prajapati Assistant Dean, DSA jitendra.prajapati@snu.edu.in 663
5 Dr Kamal Agrawal Assistant Dean, DSA kamal.agrawal@snu.edu.in 208
6 Mr Sudhir Kumar Associate Manager sudhir.kumar@snu.edu.in 837
7 Ms Karthika Student Affairs Coordinator karthika@snu.edu.in 462
Hostel Team
Sno Name Designation Email ID
Deputy Dean of Students and
1 Col Pratik Saxena (Retd.) Head Hostel Administration pratik.saxena@snu.edu.in
2 Gaurav Bhardwaj Senior Warden gaurav.bhardwaj@snu.edu.in
3 Vishveer Singh Senior Warden vishveer.singh@snu.edu.in
4 Neelam Chaudhary Senior Warden neelam.chaudhary@snu.edu.in
5 Anuradha Sharma Senior Warden anuradha.sharma@snu.edu.in
6 Balbeer Bahadur Singh Senior Warden balbeer.singh@snu.edu.in
7 Preeti Jain Warden preeti.jain@snu.edu.in
8 Vineeta Ruhela Warden vineeta.ruhela@snu.edu.in
9 Ajay sharma Warden ajay.sharma@snu.edu.in
10 Anil Kumar Warden anil.kumar1@snu.edu.in
11 Kuldeep Sharma Warden kuldeep.sharma@snu.edu.in
12 Caroline Kropi Warden caroline.kropi@snu.edu.in
Sports Team:
Sl No. Name Designation Email Ext No.
1 Randeep Baruah Deputy Director - Sports randeep.baruah@snu.edu.in 6624
2 Pawan Negi Senior Sports Officer & Table Tennis Coach pawan.negi@snu.edu.in 372
3 Sudipta Sil Yoga Instructor sudipta.sil@snu.edu.in
4 Arpit Gupta Tennis Coach arpit.gupta@snu.edu.in
5 Parminder Singh Gym Instructor parminder.singh@snu.edu.in
6 Rajat Sharma Volleyball Coach rajat.sharma@snu.edu.in
7 Sanjay Kumar Football Coach sanjay.kumar@snu.edu.in
8 Surender Singh Cricket Coach surender.singh@snu.edu.in
9 Gaurav Grewal Basketball Coach gaurav.grewal@snu.edu.in
10 Priyanka Bhati Wall-climbing Instructor & Junior Executive priyanka1@snu.edu.in
11 Sonu Prasad Squash coach sonu@snu.edu.in
12 Siddhant Yadava Badminton Coach siddhant.yadava@snu.edu.in
55
Student Council
The Student council is the apex student body of Shiv Nadar IOE. The primary objective of the Student Council is to look after all the issues
concerning the students of Shiv Nadar IOE. The grievances and suggestions of the students are directed to the concerned administration for
addressal through the Student Council framework.
OFFICE BEARERS’25
Position Name Email ID
President Zafar Habib po.sc@snu.edu.in
Vice President Easwar Balakrishnan vp.sc@snu.edu.in
Cultural Secretary Aditi Mohapatra cs.sc@snu.edu.in
Sports Secretary Snehil Konatham ss.sc@snu.edu.in
EXECUTIVE CABINET
Secretary of Senate Kavyaa Kannan sos.sc@snu.edu.in
Reva Sonawane
Secretary of Campus Affairs ca.sc@snu.edu.in
Karthik Jalluri
Asmita Mittal
Secretary of Treasury ts.sc@snu.edu.in
Tejas Garg
Secretary of Academic Affairs (Engg) Shreyas Achal
aas.sc@snu.edu.in
Secretary of Academic Affairs (Non-Engg) Darshin Mevcha
Secretary of Press Rohithi Swarna Repalle ps.sc@snu.edu.in
Secretary of Technical Affairs Arnav Prabhakhar tec.sc@snu.edu.in
Secretary of IT Saathvik Mullapudi its.sc@snu.edu.in
Secretary of Food Affairs Sriniketh Sriram sofa.sc@snu.edu.in
Office of the Registrar
The Office of the Registrar supports the students, faculty, and staff of the University by performing a wide spectrum of functions related to student services,
keeping records, and academic administration. The Registrar is the University’s nodal point for interfacing with the statutory bodies and the state/central govern-
ments.
There are five members, including the Registrar, in the Office of the Registrar. You can contact the Office of the Registrar at D012.
Sno Name Designation Email ID Ext.no
1 Mr. Sudhir Naudiyal Registrar registrar@snu.edu 211
2 Mr. Amit Kumar Agarwal Assistant Registrar amit.agarwal@snu.edu.in 638
3 Mr. Benoy James Associate Manager benjoy.james@snu.edu.in 811
4 Mr. Ravinder Kumar Associate Manager ravinder.kumar@snu.edu.in 854
5 Mr. Sudhanshu Kumar Singh Associate Manager sudhanshu.singh@snu.edu.in 749
All students are responsible for checking and updating their parents/ personal data held with Registrar’s office.
56
Office of the Dean of Academics
The Office of the Dean of Academics has the responsibility for developing and implementing the academic and administrative policies pertaining
to the academic programs and students at the University, in accordance with the University’s mission to “to develop and educate the path-shapers
of tomorrow, capable of responsible and ethical leadership”.
Students can download the Digiicampus App from the Play Store or App Store and share their queries and suggestions on academic matters
through the “Campus Help Centre”. They may also meet the members of the Office of the Dean of Academics located at D 016 on the University
campus.
For any help, students may contact the Student Academic Guidance Experts (SAGES)- Jagmeet Kaur and Neha Gautam at the Office of the Dean
of Academics.
Sno Name Designation Email ID Ext.no
Dean of Academics
1 Dr. Partha Chatterjee dean.academics@snu.edu.in 446
Professor, Department of Economics
Assistant Dean - Academics, Office of Dean
2 Dr. Shabana Mitra Academics shabana.mitra@snu.edu.in 453
Associate Professor, Department of Economics
Associate Dean - Academics, Office of Dean
Academics
3 Dr. Ankur Mehra ankur.mehra@snu.edu.in 421
Assistant Professor, Department of Finance,
Accounting and Control
Dr. Balamurugan Associate Dean (Student Engagement), Office of
4 balamurugan.balusamy@snu.edu.in 742
Balusamy Dean Academics
Program Coordinator, Office of Dean
5 Vikas Singh vikas.singh@snu.edu.in 122
Academics
6 Shailendra Kumar Shukla Deputy Manager, Office of Dean Academics shailendra.shukla@snu.edu.in 6995
7 Rahul Ishwar Deputy Manager, Office of Dean Academics rahul.ishwar@snu.edu.in 395
Educational Technologist, Office of Dean Academ-
8 Ashraf Saeed ashraf.saeed@snu.edu.in 731
ics
Program Manager, Office of Dean Academics and
9 Jagmeet Kaur jagmeet.kaur@snu.edu.in 363
SAGE
Academic Coordinator, Office of Dean Academics
10 Neha Gautam neha.gautam@snu.edu.in 740
and SAGE
11 Jyoti Gautam Coordinator - Clubs & Societies jyoti.gautam@snu.edu.in 6660
57
Finance Department
S.No. Name Designation Email ID Ext No.
1 Mr Abhinav Gaur Director abhinav.gaur@snu.edu.in 140
2 Monika Rana Sr. Manager monika.rana@snu.edu.in 389
3 Kapil Kumar Manager kapil.kumar@snu.edu.in 6626
4 Rohit Agarwal Manager rohit.agarwal1@snu.edu.in 6551
5 Pooja Bindal Deputy Manager pooja.bindal@gmail.com 624
6 Rahul Verma Associate Manager rahul.verma@snu.edu.in 451
7 Subir Kumar Dey Associate Manager subir.dey@snu.edu.in 6615
6613
8 Md. Ashfaq Khan Associate Manager ashfaq.khan@snu.edu.in
58
Annexure A
Suggested list: Items to be brought for day to day needs:
• Bedspreads/ bed sheets/ towel
• Pillow and pillow covers.
• Bucket, mug, soap case
• Cloth hangers
• Toiletries for personal use (soap, shampoo, toothpaste, shaving razor/cream, etc.)
• Umbrella
• An extra pair of spectacles (if applicable)
• Table Lamp
• Padlock with Keys for cupboard
• Mosquito Repellents
• Water bottles
• A suitcase (with a lock) for keeping personal effects in the hostel room
• Torch
• Personal medicines
• Face mask
• Blanket and woollen clothing for winters (can also be purchased after a couple of months)
• A pair of bathroom slippers and sneakers
• Bicycle (optional)
Annexure B
Please access the following policies on SNU Links: https://snulinks.snu.edu.in/snuPolicies/
students/
• Policy for OCJ (On Campus Job)
• Policy on Change of Major for UG
• Anti-Ragging Affidavit
• Fee Policy
• Damages Policy
• Transcript Issuance Policy
• Gender Policy
• UG Handbook - Academics
• Policy on Academic Malpractice
• UG Minor Programs Offered at the University
• Whistleblower Policy
• Policy for Dealing with violation of the student Code of Conduct.
• Information Technology
• Policy for Prohibition of Consumption, Possession and Distribution of Banned and Prohibited
Substances on the campus
• Policy for Student Identification from Security Camera Footage
• Policy for Reimbursement of expenditure by students on university events
• Policy for Retention of Tuition Fee Waivers for Undergraduate, Master’s and PhD Students
• Policy on Suspension of Disciplinary Award on Special Consideration.
SNU Links: https://snulinks.snu.edu.in/ snuPolicies/students/
59
Annexure C
Cultural Clubs
AURA is a non-profit initiative that is trying to play a bigger role in society and its progress. With the primary
goal of teaching underprivileged students and providing more wholesome learning experiences from grades 3-8,
AURA is a
team of motivated volunteers who wish to do good for society, resonating with the club’s ideal of “go, engross,
give”.
ARC, The Amateur Radio club aims to provide a platform for the exchange of dialogue and to facilitate accessibili-
ty and dissemination of information. The club conducts various programs and activities as to advance the general
interest and welfare of Shiv Nadar community.
The Adventure Club aims to test out deep waters and give you an adrenaline rush as you look into the horizon
from a mountain peak or paraglide through the sky. The club plans and exe- cutes end semester trips and makes
adventure approachable!
Campus Caravan is the newspaper club of Shiv Nadar Institute of Eminence. It not only covers national and inter-
national news but also has opinion pieces on current events-both inside and outside of SHIV NADAR IOE. It aims
to be a voice of the student community and spark stimulat- ing conversations among them.
CineU is the film making society of Shiv Nadar IOE, established with the objective to appreciate the art of film. It
strives to upkeep that aim by igniting discussions and organising events such as critiques, talks, discussions and
quizzes to goad audiences’ imagination and inspiration.
DebSoc is the Debating Society of Shiv Nadar University, which looks forward to inspiring the spirit of formal and
logical debate with the future decision makers.
FACTion is the quizzing society of Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence that regularly organizes quizzes for the
entire college and beyond and participates in reputed external quizzes.
Enchant, The Fashion and Lifestyle club with an extensive Instagram presence, model photo- shoot and external
participations for Fashion shows. An exciting forum for Designers, Models, Choreographers, Hairstylists, Photog-
raphers, and Makeup artists to explore their passion for Fashion!
Feeding India is a youth-run not-for-profit organization, established to eradicate hunger, malnutri- tion and food
wastage in India. We, here at SNU, are a small chapter of this organization hoping to create a significant change,
albeit small, but one that impacts those closest to us. Feeding India (SNU Chapter) was established to feed
underprivileged children in the Delhi-NCR region. In the process, the volunteers seek to interact with them and
understand their circumstance; offer a listening ear and empathy.
The Girl Up initiative is a campaign of the United Nations Foundation. Girl Up SHIV NADAR IOE aims to channel
the energy and enthusiasm of students to promote global, institutional and mutual respect for all genders by
creating an impact locally. While doing so, we strive to be the voice of any person whose agency is taken away
and we hope to create a safe, healthy and productive space.
This is done through the pillars of Challenges, Advocacy, Storytelling and Fundraising.
60
Go Green is a social and environmental club which works towards a cleaner and greener society. We tend to help
our SNU society by our awareness programmes, related workshops, social drives and plantation drives.
Imprints, the Dramatics Society of Shiv Nadar University aims to provide all the
theatre lovers and nukkad enthusiasts an opportunity to learn more about this beautiful art and
to improve as an individual.
Inferno, the dance society at Shiv Nadar University, was established in 2011. Our team compris- es of two crews:
Hustle - the Western Dance Crew, and Inaayat - the Classical Dance crew. The club has immense potential and
regularly organises dance classes under professional guidance to kindle the spirit of dance. The dance society pro-
motes participation at intra- university as well as inter- university level to tap the latent talent of fellow SNUites
Inspiria is the business society of SHIV NADAR IOE, which offers a dynamic environment for like-minded individ-
uals to hone their professional skills and build strong networks. Through workshops, competitions, and lectures
by corporate leaders, the society equips members with valuable skills and industry knowledge. Ultimately, the aim
is to foster future leaders that go business and
beyond.
Kalakriti is the Creative club of Shiv Nadar University. It provides a space for budding artists to come together
and showcase their talents through different art mediums. The club provides with opportunities like workshops,
student- mentor programs and competitions with an aim to create new artists and enhance the skills of the exist-
ing ones, keeping the passion for art and creativity alive.
SNU’s mental health awareness and wellness club. This club is a safe space that aims to spread positivity
throughout campus, hoping to pervade student’s lives with joy by organising and engaging feel-good activities.
This to easy access club will also provide a platform for people to share their own personal conflicts in the form
of trained and supervised peer guides. We’ll also be taking consistent aid from the mental health team of Blue
Circle, the on campus
medical service provider.
At Mythiya, we analyse folklore, urban legends and mythology. We are not just satisfied with dis- cussing these
myths as they exist, but in viewing them through the lens of different disciplines.
We are a collective of gamers and our aim is to provide the student body a variety of activities to participate
in. The mission is divided into 2 different kinds of activities, namely: Online and Of- fline. The offline segments
contains various Board Games, Card Games, etc. The online category contains all games which are available for
the online platform such as COD, Cs Go, FIFA, DOTA, Fortnite, etc
Sigree is a forum for food and cooking enthusiasts. We believe nothing can get people to- gether better than
food. We experiment, create and share our love for food with the SNU community.
Shiv Nadar University’s MUN society focuses on competing in multiple MUNs across the NCR MUN circuit and
aims to organise inter and intra-MUNs. The entire team is determined to achieve these goals and has attended
over 250 conferences, winning and receiving cash prizes in most of them.
The SNUQC aims to make SNU a safer and more inclusive space for LGBTQ+ youth and every individual. We aim
to increase awareness about how gender identities and sexual orientations affect us.
61
“Music gives a soul to the universe, wings to the mind and flight to the imagination.” Snuphoria, the music society
of Shiv Nadar University is the
confluence of all the musicians to share and develop their passion for sound and music.
SPIC MACAY is a non-political voluntary movement which seeks the promotion and conserva- tion of Indian
classical music and dance, folk arts, crafts and culture amongst youth by organising events of the same.
When news affects discourse, it needs to be discussed. Stimulus, Shiv Nadar University’s discus- sion society,
aims to provide a space for conducive discussion and deliberation on thought-pro- voking subjects, where every
voice is heard without bias. There is no winner or loser, just your opinion.
The TEDx Club at Shiv Nadar University believes in the principle that Ideas Change Everything and provides a fo-
rum for fruitful discussions and propagation within the campus community. In lieu of this aim, the club organises
the annual TEDxShivNadarUniversity conference on the world’s biggest platform.
Toastmasters SNU provides a positive learning experience in which members are empowered to develop commu-
nication and leadership skills, resulting in greater self-confidence and personal growth.
Pixels, photography and club of Shiv Nadar IOE, serves as a hub for photography enthusiasts,
allowing enthusiasts across all skill levels to bond over a shared passion for photography.
Wula, the Comedy club of Shiv Nadar IOE, focuses on different aspects of Comedy, including, Stand-up, Improv,
Sketches and Memes, working towards bettering both comedians, and the people who work behind the stage
to make the event happen. The club focuses on its members, who aspire to be comedians, and helps integrate
different styles of writing to form a cohesive set.
words.Ink is the literary and spoken arts club of Shiv Nadar IOE. It endeavours to create a safe space for discus-
sion and self-expression. Poetry, Book, Fandom and Thespian sub-societies within the club facilitate vibrant and
interactive discussions and even gameshows on all things literary. It often holds engaging workshops on various
literary topics eg creative writing for members of the club
Around The World, the language and culture club of Shiv Nadar IOE, helps members expand their knowledge and
understanding of the languages, cultures, and festivals of different states and countries around the world, and
assists students in obtaining a broader perspective span- ning across languages and cultures.
The Active Dreams, a nonprofit chapter at SNU, is dedicated to raising menstrual hygiene aware- ness and
generating employment opportunities for women in rural India. Through its growth and efforts, TAD is fostering
a positive influence in our community by challenging taboos and educat- ing individuals. It offers a platform for
individuals to make a significant difference in society
62
Annexure C
Technical Clubs /Societies
The ACM(Association for Computer Machinery) Student Chapter is the Computer Science Society at Shiv
Nadar University. We organize programming competitions and practice sessions, research talks by profes-
sionals from academia and industry, tutorials on technical subjects, and other com- puter science outreach
activities on campus. Our activities aim to promote appreciation of the intellectual richness of the discipline
while developing valuable professional skills in the student community.
ACM-W (Association for Computing Machinery - Women in Computing, Shiv Nadar University) is a local
chapter of ACM-W dedicated to supporting, celebrating, and advocating for women in computing. ACM-W
provides a wide range of programs and services to ACM members and works to advance the contributions
of technical women. ACM-W encourages more women participa- tion, unites educators, researchers and
professionals to inspire
dialogue, share resources and address the field’s challenges.
Analytica is Shiv Nadar University’s pioneering club dedicated to Data Science, Data Analytics, AI, and ML.
Our mission is to foster a vibrant community where students can explore and excel in these fields through
engaging workshops, seminars, and hands-on projects. We aim to drive
innovation and inclusivity, empowering students to achieve greatness through the power of data.
The ASCE chapter club at our institution is a vibrant community of civil engineering enthusiasts. Our
mission is to elevate technical prowess and foster professional growth through engaging programs and
activities. We offer opportunities for skill refinement and idea exchange. With access to research resources
and mentorship, our club aims to ignite passion and excellence in civil engineering endeavours.
Beyond Borders is the official society of the Department of International Relations and Gover- nance
Studies (IRGS). Despite being a young club, we strive to make the course and university experience extend
beyond classroom lectures by conducting a variety of events that provide enriching engagement with the
course content. The club also organises events that support students in their future endeavours, including
frequent discussions on contemporary issues. Our core aim is to offer fruitful engagement to International
Relations students through events and activities that encourage critical interaction with the course mate-
rial, combining academically stimulating and enjoyable activities to deeply involve students with both the
course and each other.
As a chapter of SEDS (Students for Exploration and Development of Space) at Shiv Nadar Uni- versity, we
promote the love for astronomy and all things space by organizing stargazing nights, discussions, screenings
and other exciting events in the university. We are a club not just for people in the STEM fields
but for anyone who likes to wonder how the universe works.
Chemistry is a central science, laying the foundation for understanding every phenomenon in the universe.
The Chemistry Society is a technical club under the Department of Chemistry where we bring all chemistry
enthusiasts under a single roof to satisfy their curiosity, share their knowledge and get a new perspective of
the subject. Just like the subject itself, we are a versatile group that deals in revealing complex concepts in
an enjoyable manner.
63
The Design Club of Shiv Nadar University is a vibrant community fostering creativity and inno- vation.
Focused on enhancing design skills and promoting collaborative projects, the club aims to provide students
with hands-on experience in various design disciplines. Through workshops, competitions, and guest lec-
tures, members are encouraged to explore new ideas and push the boundaries of conventional design. The
club’s mission is to cultivate a supportive environment
where aspiring designers can grow and contribute to impactful projects, reflecting the university’s commit-
ment to nurturing talent and
creativity. Our motto is Unite. Create. Inspire.
E-cell strives to provide a platform for students and faculty to create, innovate, incubate and realise their
entrepreneurial dreams while encouraging to “think upside down” to venture beyond the normal. By foster-
ing a collaborative environment, we aim to transform visionary ideas into successful ventures.
The Economics Society, Shiv Nadar IOE is a student-run society which aims to foster study and discussions
pertaining to Economics. It is dedicated towards promoting Economics not only on academic grounds but
through a culture which appreciates variability and versatility. We believe in making Economics accessible
to all through encouragement and inculcation of ideas from various other disciplines. The Society holds
its annual flagship event, Iqtisadiyyat which serves as a platform for accomplished academics and industry
leaders to engage in economic discourse with students and provide valuable insights into the workings of
the real world.
At Finvest we are committed to expanding financial literacy and promoting
financial independence among the student body. Our goal is to empower individuals with the knowledge
and skills necessary to make informed financial decisions and take control of their fi- nancial future We
achieve this through a variety of engaging events and interactive sessions, such as Snifty and Finverse. Our
community of dedicated members is dedicated to helping others
achieve their financial goals
What good is life science if you cannot communicate it? The students of the life
science department have come together to break all barriers between the life science and the general pub-
lic. Killing stereotypes to make it fun and understandable. With talks, movie screen- ings, and many more
fun events, we strive to bring out the inner scientist in you!
H2O - House of Haber’s: The Chemical Engineering Society is a society for
students interested in chemical engineering by organizing educational workshops, networking events, and
industry talks. We aim to enhance member’s academic and professional development while promoting
collaboration & innovation within the field.
IEEE is the world’s largest technical professional organization dedicated to advancing technol- ogy for the
benefit of humanity. IEEE and its members inspire a global community through its highly cited publications,
conferences, technology standards, and professional and educational activities.
The History Society believes that everyone has a sense of the past and an
understanding of history. Our vision is to create a comfortable space for all to interact and we encourage a
multi-disciplinary perspective on history.
Throughout the year, we organise talks, film screenings, student quizzes, and other activities.
The Department of Mathematics founded club indulges in mathematical events in not only aca- demic but
daily lives amongst the students to bolster fresher and riper perspectives to mathemat- ics and its applica-
tions. Probabilistic games are
a campus-favourite and a regular event by the society.
64
Mnemon, the History and Archaeology Society, aims to organise and host events that make history a more
accessible discipline. The routine events of the club include organising a History Week, having game nights,
discussions, film screenings, and partaking in heritage walks. The club’s ethos is essentially the creation of
an environment in which everyone is comfortable en- gaging with the various aspects of the discipline, and
various discourses related to it.
The Physics society at SNU is founded with strong will for nurturing physics in
various possible ways. Its sole object is, and shall be, promoting physics and bringing physicists among stu-
dents. It will provide a common forum for enthusiast of physics at SNU for discussing subjects of common
interest.
Moreover, it will invite renowned national international academicians and researchers among students for
enriching scientific temperament within and outside SNU.
RoboYantriki, the Tech Heart of Shiv Nadar IOE is the place to tinker, innovate and create. Giving students
enough exposure to various events and competitions through hands-on experience and curiosity. We are
a multidisciplinary club enhancing problem solving and overall skill growth of individuals, with numerous
achievements at national and international competitions.
SAEINDIA is an affiliate society of SAE International, registered as an Indian non-profit engineering and
scientific society dedicated to the advancement of the mobility community in India. The chapter provides
engineering students with practical exposure to a leading profes- sional automative engineering society and
the framework to start expanding automative and automobile
engineering activities without starting from scratch.
Totem Pole is the student society of the Department of Sociology. It is
responsible for making the discipline of sociology available to a larger audience through various events. In
the past, we’ve held movie screenings and critical discussions, panel discussions and have collaborated with
several other clubs on campus. Furthermore, members have presented and discussed undergraduate papers
at other universities such as Delhi University, and O.P. Jindal.
Trivium is the English Departmental Society which was formed in 2020. It aims
to create a space for students to engage with concepts outside of the classroom and learn critical skills
that will help them in life. By conducting events such as workshops, seminars, movie screen- ings and peer
review sessions we hope to encourage students in going beyond the scope of what
they believe English Literature has to offer.
ASME-SNU offers a dynamic platform for engineering students, aiming to
enhance technical competency and professional well-being. Engaging in events like E-Fest, it fosters global
connections and provides opportunities for skill development and idea sharing. With a focus on design
and innovation competitions, as well as access to research archives and mentorship, it inspires students to
thrive in the world of engineering.
Google Developer Student Clubs are university-based community groups for
students interested in Google developer technologies. Students from all undergraduate or graduate
programs with an interest in growing as a developer are welcome. By joining a GDSC, students grow their
knowledge in a peer-to- peer learning environment and build solutions for local businesses and their
community.
ShilpKulam is the mechanical society of SNU, whose main aim is to make the
students realise the importance of the subjects that they learn in their curriculum by inculcating it in the
real-life projects. The society believes in faculty - student interaction, among students’ kind of industry-ori-
ented topics. The society has been conducting workshops and guest lectures on different subjects to
garnish interest and enthusiasm of the students as per their interest.
SNUCES, the civil engineering society of SNU is a technical club comprising of
civil engineering enthusiasts. The society promotes industry-academic partnership for objective oriented
learning and industrial relevance in academic research. It has been organizing industrial visits and talks. In
the recent past, the society conducted several events and workshops for civil engineering software like
Revit, BIM and AUTOCAD.
65
Frequently Asked Question
What is Student Handbook?
The Student Handbook is a guide that explains university rules, policies, and procedures to help
students navigate campus life. It covers academic requirements, conduct expectations, and
contact information for various services. It’s essentially a reference manual telling students what
they need to know and who to contact for help.
How can I report safety concerns on campus?
You can report safety concerns on campus by contacting campus security or the DSA office. It’s
important to report any safety issues promptly to ensure the safety of everyone on campus.
What is the DSA helpdesk used for?
The DSA helpdesk serves as the primary support hub for students, catering to various needs
such as lost & found items, CCTV footage permissions, booking accommodation for parents, and
handling routine non- academic inquiries of students.
How can I obtain a duplicate ID card?
If your ID card is lost, you can request a duplicate through the ID Card Management System
available in SNUlinks.
What resources are available for students experiencing financial difficulties?
We offer resources and support for students experiencing financial difficulties, including
Scholarships and On Campus Jobs
Can I do an OCJ (On Campus Jobs) in my first semester?
First-year students are not permitted to participate in OCJ during their first semester.
How to book a room in the Visitor’s Hostel for my Parents?
A mail should be sent to dsahelpdesk@snu.edu.in for booking VH with the following information.
1. Name of Student
2. Roll Number of Student
3. Relationship of visitors with student
4. Number of visitors, names, and attachment of government ID proof of each of the visitors
5. Reason for visiting
6. Dates on which the room is required (date of arrival and departure)
Emails by guests themselves/ those from a non-SN IoE ID will not be entertained. The request for
VH booking will be considered only for parents of the students.
What transportation options are available for students?
The university-chartered buses are available for students on the weekends on paid basis. The
bus shuttles between a Noida Great India Place Mall and the University. The Campus Affairs
Committee manages the service, and the trips are planned on the recommendation of the
committee.
66
What health services are provided on campus?
The University offers a wide range of Health services which provides physical and mental health
support through a primary health care set-up and an OPD. Pre-hospital management care is done
on campus and all medical emergencies are provided on a 24x7 basis. The Health Centre has a
team of four doctors (general physicians), two resident physiotherapists, two clinical psychological
counsellors, and dentist, besides nursing staff and ambulances. A visiting Psychiatrist, Orthopedic,
Gynecologist, Dermatologist may be consulted at the clinic on their scheduled day of the week or
fortnight. Deployed medical staff on campus has well defined OPD slots can be booked by logging
on https://www. healthyhcl.in/snioe/#book or by walk-in to the clinic.
If I fall sick whom should I report to?
In case you are unwell while in the hostel, please contact the hostel warden. They will assist
you for further management/shifting you to the health centre. If you are outside your hostel on
campus, seek help from friends and go directly to the health center. Alternatively, you can ask the
nearest security guard for assistance and call for an ambulance immediately if needed.
How can I call an ambulance in case of emergency?
Contact your hostel warden or dial on the mobile numbers: 9560517624 or 9311331953. Save
them in your phone as emergency contact number.
Whom should I contact for special medical requirements and special meals in case of any food
allergy?
Contact Mr. Sudhir Kumar, Associate Manager in the Department of Student Affairs, with valid
medical documents. His email id is sudhir.kumar@snu.edu.in
How do I access online counseling services?
We have a tie up with India’a largest Online Counselling services platform YourDost. You can
access the website by visiting www.yourdost.com sign up using your official student email (@snu.
edu.in), and begin chatting with a YourDOST expert for professional guidance. There is also a 24 X
7 helpline No. 1800 891 3499 for urgent consultation without prior appointment.
What is YourDOST?
YourDOST is an online counseling platform offering support for various concerns, available 24/7 in
regional languages.
Are there charges for medical, counseling, and YourDOST services?
Primary medical facilities, counseling services (offline and online), and YourDOST counselling are
provided free of charge to students.
How can I access mental health counseling services on campus?
You can access mental health counseling services on campus by scheduling an appointment with
the counseling center. They offer confidential counseling sessions, support groups, and resources
to help you manage stress, anxiety, depression, and other mental health concerns.
67
What support services are available for students with disabilities?
We provide comprehensive support services for students with disabilities, including
accommodations for classes, assistive technology, accessible campus facilities, and disability
advocacy resources.
Where can I report a ragging incident?
Contact Dr. Anshu Paliwal, Associate Director and Head of Student Life at D036D for in person
visit or you may also like to write her at anshu.paliwal@snu.edu.in Or you may like to visit the
Department of Student Affairs in D Block, Ground Floor, Office D010. You can also write to
antiragging helpline at antiragging@snu. edu.in
What is a Family Group?
Family Groups, led by senior students, support first-year undergraduates during their transition to
university life, providing guidance and access to information.
Who is a Gender Champion?
Gender Champions are student leaders who promote gender equality and respect within the
university community, reporting to the Associate Director and Head of Student Life. First year
students can also apply to become the Gender Champions. Forms will be out in the month of
August for Freshers.
Who are peer support guides?
Peer Support Guides are students dedicated to providing support and guidance to their peers,
especially those facing emotional challenges, to ensure a safe and inclusive university environment
with utmost confidentiality. They are usually senior students.
Can I start a new club on campus?
Yes, you can start a new club on campus by submitting a club proposal outlining your club’s
purpose, activities, and membership criteria to the Dean of Students and Associate Director,
Student Engagements office for approval. New clubs are usually approved if there is adequate
demand for it.
Are there opportunities for international students to get involved in campus activities?
Absolutely! We encourage international students to participate in campus activities, clubs, and
events to enrich their college experience and connect with fellow students. You can also explore
cultural exchange programs and international student organizations.
Are there opportunities for students to showcase their talents through performances or
exhibitions?
Yes, students can showcase their talents at various fests and events organized by the University.
Students can also participate in events at other universities after due approval by DSA.
How can I stay updated on campus news, events, and announcements?
You can stay updated on campus news, events, and announcements through University
newsletter, Digi screens placed on the campus, following official social media accounts, checking
the university website regularly, and joining student communication platforms or apps.
68
What clubs and organizations can I join on campus, and how do I get involved?
You can join a variety of clubs and organizations based on your interests including academic
clubs, cultural clubs, recreational clubs, and societies, as well as volunteer groups. You can get
involved by attending club fairs, joining club meetings, participating in club activities, and taking on
leadership roles.
What types of hostel rooms does the University offer?
The University provides Twin and Single rooms in both AC and Non-AC categories, with common
toilets. Room allocation depends on the student’s enrolled course and availability.
Are there hostel accommodations with attached bathrooms?
Yes, we offer accommodation with both attached and common bathrooms, depending on the
course enrolled for and availability.
What facilities are available to students in the hostel?
Hostel facilities include 24/7 security, 24/7 power backup, 24/7 internet connectivity, Laundry
services , Mess facilities, Sports facilities ,First aid and medical facilities
How many meals are provided daily?
Four meals are provided: Breakfast, Lunch, Evening Snacks, and Dinner. In addition, there ia a
midnight mess provided from 2300hrs to 0200hrs.
What is the quality of food like?
The university contracts mess facilities based on Food Safety and Standards Authority of India
parameters. Currently, Sodexo provides these services. The menu is created in consultation with
student representatives and experienced staff. We maintain high food quality and adhere to strict
hygiene standards.
What items are provided to students in the hostel?
Each student is provided with a bed with mattress, study table, chair, cupboard, AC / Non-AC
room with common facilities.
Is there medical insurance for students?
Yes, the University provides medical insurance for all students upto an amount of Rs 2.5 lakhs
(hospitalization only).
Is Shiv Nadar IoE a ragging-free zone?
Yes, Shiv Nadar IoE maintains a strict zero-tolerance policy against ragging in hostels and on
campus, in compliance with Supreme Court, Government of India, UGC, AICTE, and State
Government regulations.
Can students keep personal vehicles on campus?
No, personal vehicles are not allowed. Students are encouraged to use bicycles to keep the
campus pollution-free.
Is there a laundry facility in the hostel?
Yes, laundry facilities are available in the hostel for a nominal charge, offering both wet cleaning
and ironing services.
69
How do I report anything not working or needing repair in my room?
Write a mail, addressed to callbob@snu.edu.in with the cc to warden, to report anything not
working or needing repair in the hostel room. For sample mail, please refer to Pg 42 in the student
handbook.
What are the rules for leaving campus for the day or overnight?
UG students cannot leave campus without explicit permission, which can be applied online using
the Digii campus app. The app has separate modules for day out and night out. Day out does not
require approval, but night out needs parental approval for UG and RM students. PG, MBA, and
Ph.D. students do not need parental approval for night out movement. All students/scholars must
enter their details in the register at reception when going on a night out and close it upon return.
What sports are offered in the University?
Coaching for the following sports are available: Athletics (Track & Field), Badminton, Basketball,
Cricket, Squash, Football, Volleyball, Table Tennis, Tennis, Yoga.
Other than this, there are student-led clubs for horse riding, chess, cycling and mixed martial arts.
What are the timings for sporting facilities?
Timings for ISC (Indoor Sports Complex): 6-9am and 5-9pm. ISC is closed on university holidays.
Timings for outdoor courts of badminton, tennis and basketball are 6am-11pm.
Is there a membership charge for gym or any other sport?
Currently, there is no fee for any of the facilities.
Will sports equipment be provided?
Yes, equipment may be issued from the sports store depending on availability. However, it is
recommended that you get your own equipment. Racquets, footwear and sports clothing should
be brought by students for their own use.
Do the teams participate in external and inter university tournaments?
There are university teams for all the coached sports and chess which regularly go for inter
university tournaments. Surge, The Sports Fest of Shiv Nadar IoE organized in Oct/Nov each
year is one of the biggest events as various universities come to our university to compete in a
multitude of sports.
Are there any internal/recreational events?
Yes, two of the highly anticipated events are the SNU Sports League and the Inter Hostel Cluster
Sports League. In addition the sports department organizes running and cycling events from time
to time.
There are various other recreational and competitive events happening year round as well. Please
keep an eye on your inbox for communication regarding the various sporting events.
Are there leadership opportunities with sports?
Yes, there are multiple opportunities which include being a part of the Sports Committee, Manager
of a club in SNU Sports League, Surge etc.
70
Academic Calendar Monsoon 2025
https://snu.edu.in/site/assets/files/16490/academic_calendar__monsoon_2025_2.
pdf?v=2
Emergency Services
Save the Emergency Phone Number (see at the back of ID card). It will get connected to the security
(or)
Press SOS option available in the Shiv Nadar IoE app*
*It is mandatory for students to download Shiv Nadar IoE app from playstore / appstore.
The Institution reserves the right to make additions, deletions, or changes to these policies at any time.
The updated version of The Student Handbook is available on this website.
71
Know What/Where/How
on the Shiv Nadar IoE campus
www.snu.edu.in/home
72