
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
2 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
CON TENT
ABOUT SHIV NADAR INSTITUTION OF
EMINENCE (DEEMED TO BE UNIVERSITY) 04
ABOUT THE DEPARTMENT
05
KNOW YOUR FACULTY 06
CED LABORATORY 09
UNDERGRADUATE PROGRAM IN CED
11
OPPORTUNITY FOR UNDERGRADUATE
RESEARCH (OUR) 34
STUDENT CAREER 35
CONTACT US
36
3
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
About Shiv Nadar Institution of
Eminence Delhi-NCR
Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence (SNIoE) is 1 The University has recently been
a comprehensive, multidisciplinary, research-
chosen as one of the select ten private
focused and student-centric institution that is
“Institutions of Eminence (IOE)” by the
bringing a paradigm shift in higher education
Government of India.
in India through its innovative curriculum,
interdisciplinary focus, and cross-disciplinary
2 In the NIRF (Government’s National
thinking across a wide range of disciplines.
Institutional Ranking Framework),
The University is building an eco-system of
SNU has been the youngest institution
knowledge to promote recognition of the
inter-connectedness of ideas, systems, and in the ‘top 100’ Overall list. SNU
environments in the world inside the campus, ranked 61 in the University category,
and those outside it. The University has 5 and 94 ‘Overall’ in NIRF 2022.
Schools, 23 Departments and 3 Research
Centers engaged in teaching, practice, The University has been accredited
3
and research in disciplines as diverse as
with ‘A’ Grade by the National
Engineering, Humanities & Social Sciences,
Assessment and Accreditation Council
Management, Natural Sciences, Academy of
(NAAC), valid for a period of 5 years
Continuing Education, Art, Design, Performing
from 26 November 2019.
Arts, Communication, and Extended Education
& Professional Development. The Schools
SNU is also among a select group of
offer Bachelor, Master’s, and Doctoral degrees 4
green-field institutions in the country,
along with multidisciplinary curriculum to
enable students to explore subjects and which were awarded the prestigious
disciplines that may be widely different from Atal Incubation Center grant by the
their chosen Majors. Niti Aayog, Government of India, in
the very first round in 2017.
4 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
About the Department
The Department of Civil Engineering at Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence (SNIOE) is determined to
develop scientific rigor and professional expertise in its undergraduate (B. Tech.) and postgraduate
(Ph.D.) students through our wide spectrum of core and elective courses, and to train them as skilled,
dynamic, and critical thinkers who can lead the country’s development from the forefront. The
curriculum for the Programs in the Department is designed to produce high quality professionals who
can meet industry requirements, including in leading research and development (R & D) organizations
and academic institutions, as well as, to prepare them for their entrepreneurship visions. The department
follows a one-of-a-type UG and PhD curriculum to create strong learning focus on emerging and
disruptive technologies and integrates cyber-physical systems to achieve Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs) into their learning environment by including courses on Sustainability, Machine Learning
(ML), Internet of Things (IoT) and Remote Sensing (RS) along with core subjects at UG and Ph.D. levels.
The Department of Civil Engineering has 13 well-experienced faculty members with Ph.D. degrees
from various IITs / universities from abroad offering different academic specializations.
The thrust areas of the department are
SUSTAINABLE WATER, ENVIRONMENT, URBAN NETWORK
INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEMS AND CLIMATE SYSTEMS
5
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Know Your Faculty
ATRI NATH
(Assistant Professor), PhD IIT Kharagpur.
Specialization: Structural Engineering, Computational mechanics, Steel
structures, fatigue and fracture, Material modelling
Office Location: C322A
Email Id: atri.nath@su.edu.in
ELLORA PADHI
(Assistant Professor), PhD IIT Kharagpur.
Specialization: Water Resources Engineering, Turbulence in open
channel flow, Sediment transport phenomena, River meandering.
Office Location: C322C
Email Id: ellora.padhi@su.edu.in
GHANSHYAM PAL
(Associate Professor), PhD University of Mississippi, USA.
Specialization: Structural Engineering, Building physics and sustainability,
Novel cementitious composites, Multiscale numerical modelling.
Office Location: C121H
Email Id: ghanshyam.pal@su.edu.in
GOPAL DAS SINGHAL
(Associate Professor & Associate Head), PhD IIT Roorkee.
Specialization: Water Resources Engineering, Hydraulic structures,
River hydraulics, Smart agricultural water management.
Office Location: C121J
Email Id: gopal.singhal@su.edu.in
6 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
GURMAIL BENIPAL
(Professor), PhD IIT Delhi. Specialization: Structural Engineering,
Constitutive modelling and structural theory, Damage elasto-plasticity
and Thermo-chemo-visco-elasticity of concrete, Chaos and stability of
structures.
Office Location: C322E
Email Id: Gurmail.benipl@su.edu.in
GYAN VIKASH
(Associate Professor & Head), PhD IIT Kanpur.
Specialization: Geotechnical Engineering, Computational geomechanics,
Constitutive modeling of geomaterials, Physics based - data driven
modeling in geomechanics.
Office Location: C121L
Email Id: gyan.vikash@su.edu.in
HITESH UPRETI
(Assistant Professor), PhD IIT Roorkee.
Specialization: Water Resources Engineering, Evapotranspiration,
Remote sensing in agriculture and water resources, Smart agricultural
water management, Irrigation hydrology.
Office Location: C121K
Email Id: hitesh.upreti@su.edu.in
JAGABANDHU DIXIT
(Associate Professor), PhD IIT Bombay.
Specialization: Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics, Natural
hazards and disaster risk reduction, Disaster mitigation and emergency
management.
Office Location: C322H
Email Id: jagabandhu.dixit@su.edu.in
MANOJ KUMAR SINGH
(Assistant Professor), PhD IIT Delhi.
Specialization: Structural Engineering, Adaptive thermal comfort,
Occupant’s behavior and built energy interaction, Building energy
simulation, High-performance building envelopes.
Office Location: C322B
Email Id: manoj.singh@su.edu.in
7
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
SAILESH NARAYAN BEHERA
(Associate Professor), PhD IIT Kanpur.
Specialization: Environmental Engineering, Air quality monitoring and
aerosol modeling, Policy evaluation of pollution control strategies,
Pollution scenarios with water-air-soil interactions.
Office Location: C322F
Email Id: sailesh.behera@su.edu.in
SHALINI RANKAVAT
(Assistant Professor), PhD IIT Delhi.
Specialization: Transportation Engineering, Transport planning and
policy, Traffic safety, Public transport and NMV planning.
Office Location: C121M
Email Id: shalini.rankavat@su.edu.in
SUMEDHA MOHARANA
(Associate Professor), PhD IIT Delhi.
Specialization: Structural Engineering, Piezoelectric impedance based
structural health monitoring, Smart materials, Building science.
Office Location: C121G
Email Id: sumedha.maharana@su.edu.in
SUSANT KUMAR PADHI
(Assistant Professor), PhD IIT Guwahati.
Specialization: Environmental Engineering, Biological & physico-
chemical processes in environmental engineering, Membrane
technology for wastewater treatment, Solid waste management.
Office Location: C322D
Email Id: susant.padhi@su.edu.in
8 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
CED Laboratory
The Department of Civil Engineering has many well-equipped laboratories for training our UG and
Ph.D. students and conducting research work. In addition, the Institution has established several
centralized facilities for the researchers with sophisticated research equipment e.g. Scanning electron
microscope (SEM), Metallic 3D printer, Energy dispersive X-Ray spectroscopy (EDX), Differential
scanning calorimeter (DSC), etc.
UG TEACHING LABORATORIES: PG RESEARCH LABORATORIES:
• Civil Engineering Computing Laboratory • Advance Materials and Building Energy
• Concrete Technology Laboratory Laboratory
• Environmental Engineering Laboratory • Air Quality Laboratory
• Fluid Mechanics Laboratory • Air Sampling Laboratory
• Hydraulics Laboratory • Civil Engineering Computing Laboratory
• Soil Mechanics Laboratory • Disaster Management Laboratory
• Strength of Materials Laboratory • Intelligent Geosystems Laboratory
• Survey and Geoinformatics Laboratory • Water Management Field lab
• Transportation Engineering Laboratory (Agriculture Water Management Laboratory and
River Engineering Laboratory)
9
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Details of Laboratory Staff
SURENDRA K. SHARMA JITENDRA K. TRIPATHI
Surendra.Sharma@snu.edu.in jitendra.tripathi@snu.edu.in
RAJNEESH KUMAR RAJU GUPTA
rajneesh.kumar@snu.edu.in rg868@snu.edu.in
Table 1: Details of Laboratory with Assigned Staff and Location
Name of the lab Staff Lab in-charge Lab Location
Civil Engineering Computing Lab Mr. Raju Gupta C 116
Air Pollution lab Mr. Surendra Sharma C 118
Geoinformatics Mr. Jitendra Tripathi C 109
AMBE lab Mr. Jitendra Tripathi D 117A
Experimental Soil Mechanics Mr. Raju Gupta C 014B
Environment Engineering lab Mr. Jitendra Tripathi C 017
Intelligent Geosystems Lab Mr. Raju Gupta C 014A
Fluid Mechanics Mr. Rajneesh C 013A
Hydraulic lab Mr. Rajneesh C 009
Strength of Material Lab Mr. Raju Gupta C 006
Concrete lab Mr. Surendra Sharma F 001
Transportation Engineering Lab Mr. Surendra Sharma F 101
Water Management Field Lab Mr. Rajneesh Field lab
Disaster Management Lab C 310
10 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Undergraduate Program in CED
The Department develops scientific rigor and professional expertise in undergraduate students through
its broad spectrum of core and elective courses dispersed throughout the Bachelor of Technology
(B.Tech.) coursework. The undergraduate curriculum will mold students into excellent professional
engineers by training them in different aspects of Civil engineering through modern technological,
analytical, and computational courses. The curriculum encompassing courses from Common Core
Curriculum (CCC), University-Wide Electives along with Major electives provide the student a nurturing
atmosphere to follow their passion after graduation, be it in industry, governmental position, research
or in their entrepreneurship journey.
The department offers B. Tech. level
specializations in the areas of
(I) Sustainable Infrastructure Systems
(II) Water, Environment, and Climate
(III) Urban Network Systems.
UG students also have scope to obtain Bachelor of Technology in Civil Engineering (B.Tech. in CE) with
the option of doing minor in any other stream of interest.
A. Credit Break-up of UG Curriculum in Civil Engineering (CE) Courses
(Major in Civil Engineering)
Table 2: Overall Credit Distribution
S. No. Category Credits
1 Core Common Curriculum (CCC) 18
2 University-Wide Elective (UWE) 18
3 CCC and/or UWE 6
4 Basic Sciences (BS) 17
5 Engineering Sciences (ES) 18
6 Sensing and Data Analytics 12
7 Major Core 47
8 Major Elective 12
9 Project 12
Total Credits 160
11
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Table 3: Semester-wise Credit Distribution
S. No. Category Credits
1 Semester I 19
2 Semester II 20
3 Semester III 22
4 Semester IV 20
5 Semester V 21
6 Semester VI 22
7 Semester VII 21
8 Semester VIII 15
Total Credits 160
Table 4: Basic Sciences for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits Semester Offered
1 MAT 103 Mathematical Methods-I 3:1:0 4 1
2 PHY 101 Physics-I 3:1:0 4 1
3 MAT 104 Mathematical Methods-II 3:1:0 4 2
4 PHY 103 Physics-II 3:1:1 5 2
Semester Credits 17
Table 5: Engineering Sciences for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits Semester Offered
1 CSD 101 Introduction to Computing & 3:1:0 4 2
Programming
2 CED 101 Engineering Mechanics 3:1:0 4 2
3 CED 102 Engineering Graphics 1:0:1 2 1
4 CED 215 Mechanics of Solids 3:0:1 4 3
5 CED 216 Mechanics of Fluid 3:0:1 4 3
Semester Credits 18
Table 6: Sensing and Data Analytics Courses
S. No. Course Course Title L:T:P Credits Semester
Code Offered
1 CED 217 Computational Methods 2:0:1 3 3
2 CED 218/ Risk and Reliability Analysis/ System 3:0:0 3 4
CED 221 Analysis in Civil Engineering
3 CED 310/ Introduction to Remote Sensing and GIS/ 2:0:1 3 5
CED 322 Sensors and IOT for Civil Engineering
4 CED 323/ Machine Learning for Civil Engineering/ 3:0:0 3 6
CED 324 Introduction to Data Analytics
Semester Credits 12
12 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Table 7: Major Electives for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits Semester Offered
1 *** Major Elective – I 3:0:0 3 6
2 *** Major Elective – II 3:0:0 3 7
3 *** Major Elective – III 3:0:0 3 7
4 *** Major Elective – IV 3:0:0 3 8
Semester Credits 12
Table 8: Project for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits Semester Offered
1 CED 444 Project – I 0:0:6 6 7
2 CED 419 Project – II 0:0:6 6 8
Semester Credits 12
Detailed rules and regulations regarding B.Tech. Program in SNU can be found in UG handbook
(Available at: https://snulinks.snu.edu.in/snuPolicies/students/)
B. Semester-wise Course Distribution for CE (Major)
Table 9: First Semester for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CCC *** 3
2 CCC *** 3
3 MAT 103 Mathematical Methods-I 3:1:0 4
4 PHY 101 Physics-I 3:0:1 4
5 CED 102 Engineering Graphics 1:0:1 2
6 CED 104 Civil Engineering Systems & Sustainability 3:0:0 3
Semester Credits 19
*** Credit distribution varies as per the course under consideration.
Table 10: Second Semester for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CCC *** 3
2 MAT 104 Mathematical Methods-II 3:1:0 4
3 PHY 102 Physics-II 3:1:1 5
4 CED 101 Engineering Mechanics 3:1:0 4
5 CSD 101 Introduction to Computing and Programming 3:0:1 4
Semester Credits 20
*** Credit distribution varies as per the course under consideration.
13
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Table 11: Third Semester for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 UWE *** 3
2 CCC/UWE *** 3
3 CED 206 Elements of Surveying 2:0:1 3
4 CED 214 Building Information Modeling (BIM) 1:0:1 2
5 CED 215 Mechanics of Solids 3:0:1 4
6 CED 216 Mechanics of Fluid 3:0:1 4
7 CED 217 Computational Methods 2:0:1 3
Semester Credits 22
*** Credit distribution varies as per the course under consideration.
Table 12: Fourth Semester for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 UWE *** 3
2 CCC/UWE *** 3
3 CED 203 Engineering Hydrology 2:0:0 2
4 CED 207 Hydraulic Engineering 2:0:1 3
5 CED 218 Risk and Reliability Analysis 3:0:0 3
6 CED 219 Concrete Technology 2:0:1 3
7 CED 220 Structural Analysis 3:0:0 3
Semester Credits 20
*** Credit distribution varies as per the course under consideration.
Table 13: Fifth Semester for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 UWE *** 3
2 CCC/UWE *** 3
3 CED 304 Transportation Engineering - I 3:0:1 4
4 CED 305 Design of RCC Structures 3:0:0 3
5 CED 310 Introduction to Remote Sensing and GIS 2:0:1 3
6 CED 325 Geotechnical Engineering 2:0:1 3
7 CED 326 Water Resource Engineering 2:0:0 2
Semester Credits 21
*** Credit distribution varies as per the course under consideration.
14 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Table 14: Sixth Semester for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CCC/UWE *** 3
2 Major Elective –I 3:0:0 3
3 CED 306 Foundation Analysis and Design 3:0:0 3
4 CED 308 Environmental Engineering 3:0:1 4
5 CED 327 Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructure 3:0:0 3
6 CED 323 Machine Learning for Civil Engineering 3:0:0 3
7 CED 401 Design of Steel Structures 3:0:0 3
Semester Credits 22
*** Credit distribution varies as per the course under consideration.
Table 15: Seventh Semester for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 UWE *** 3
2 UWE *** 3
3 Major Elective -II 3:0:0 3
4 Major Elective-III 3:0:0 3
5 CED 424 Estimation, Costing and Project Management 3:0:0 3
6 CED 444 Major Project-I 0:0:6 6
Semester Credits 21
*** Credit distribution varies as per the course under consideration.
Table 16: Eighth Semester for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CCC/UWE *** 3
2 CCC/UWE *** 3
3 Major Elective-IV (offline/Online) 3:0:0 3
4 CED 419 Major Project II / Internship 0:0:6 6
Semester Credits 15
*** Credit distribution varies as per the course under consideration.
For CCC/UWE, students should earn total 42 credits from CCC & UWE category in 4 year duration of
course with minimum of 18 credits in each category.
C. List of ‘Major Core’ & ‘Major Elective’ courses offered in Civil
Engineering Department
Table 17: Major Core courses for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CED 104 Civil Engineering Systems & Sustainability 3:0:0 3
2 CED 206 Elements of Surveying 2:0:1 3
3 CED 214 Building Information Modeling 1:0:1 2
15
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
4 CED 203 Engineering Hydrology 2:0:0 2
5 CED 207 Hydraulic Engineering 2:0:1 3
6 CED 219 Concrete Technology 2:0:1 3
7 CED 220 Structural Analysis 3:0:0 3
8 CED 304 Transportation Engineering - I 3:0:1 4
9 CED 305 Design of RCC Structures 3:0:0 3
10 CED 306 Foundation Analysis and Design 3:0:0 3
11 CED 424 Estimation, Costing, and Project Management 3:0:0 3
12 CED 308 Environmental Engineering 3:0:1 4
13 CED 325 Geotechnical Engineering 2:0:1 3
14 CED 326 Water Resource Engineering 2:0:0 2
15 CED 327 Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructure 3:0:0 3
16 CED 401 Design of Steel Structures 3:0:0 3
Semester Credits 47
Table 18: Major Elective courses for CE
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CED 208 Building Planning and Drawing 2:0:1 3
2 CED 210 Sustainable Infrastructure 3:0:0 3
3 CED 309 Transportation Engineering – II 3:0:0 3
4 CED 310 Introduction to Remote Sensing and GIS 2:0:1 3
5 CED 311 Watershed Management 3:0:0 3
6 CED 315 Environmental Management in Industries 3:0:0 3
7 CED 402 Statistics in Engineering 1:0:2 3
8 CED 403 Pavement Design 3:0:0 3
9 CED 404 Photogrammetry and GPS 2:1:0 3
10 CED 405 Air Quality Science and Engineering 3:0:0 3
11 CED 406 Analysis of Tall Building 2:0:1 3
12 CED 407 Transportation Systems 3:0:0 3
13 CED 408 Spatial Analysis and Digital Image 2:0:1 3
14 CED 409 Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering 3:0:0 3
15 CED 411 Earthquake Engineering 3:0:0 3
16 CED413 Biological Process in Environmental 3:0:0 3
17 CED420 Building Physics 3:0:0 3
18 CED 421 Public Transport Systems 2:0:0 2
19 CED422 Transportation Law Seminar 2:0:0 2
20 CED426 Transport Infrastructure 3:0:0 3
21 CED 431 Hydropower Engineering 3:0:0 3
22 CED 432 Mechanics of Geomaterials 3:0:0 3
23 CED 433 Physio-chemical Processes Environmental Engineering 3:0:0 3
Semester Credits 47
16 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
D. Minor in Civil Engineering
Students from other disciplines can earn Minor in Civil Engineering after completing the following
courses successfully.
Table 19: Courses for getting a Minor in Civil Engineering
S. No. Course Course Title L:T:P Credits Semester
Code Offered
Compulsory Courses (All to be taken)
1 CED 104 Civil Engineering Systems & Sustainability 3:0:0 3 1
2 CED 206 Elements of Surveying 2:0:1 3 3
3 CED 215 Mechanics of Solid 3:0:1 4 3
4 CED 219 Concrete Technology 2:0:1 3 4
Optional Courses (At least 2 out of the six listed below.
Overall credits should be between 19-21 credits)
1 CED 216 Mechanics of Fluid 3: 0: 1 4 3
2 CED 207 Hydraulic Engineering 2: 0: 1 3 4
3 CED 304 Transportation Engineering-I 3: 0: 1 4 5
4 CED 325 Geotechnical Engineering 2: 0: 1 3 5
5 CED 306 Foundation Engineering & Design 3: 0: 0 3 6
6 CED 308 Environmental Engineering 3: 0: 1 4 6
E. Specialization for UG students
The Civil Engineering Department offers Specializations to its UG students in the following three
broad specializations:
1. Sustainable Infrastructure Systems
2. Water, Environment and Climate
3. Urban Network Systems
The students will be required to take 3 courses (minimum of 9 credits) from the pool of elective
courses offered in the respective area of the specialization of their choice. To complete specialization
in the respective area, the students are also required to finish their 7th semester FYUP project in the
same specialization area. Thus, the students will be required to complete a minimum of 15 overall
credits through the course work (9 credits minimum) and FYUP project (6 credits) in the 7th semester
to earn the specialization.
F. Brief description of courses offered in the UG program
1. Introduction to Physics I (PHY 101)
Mechanics: Reference frames and coordinate systems, Newton’s laws of motion in vector notation,
Conservation of energy, Application of Newton’s laws of motion, Dynamical stability of systems:
Potential energy diagram, Collisions: Impulse, conservation of energy and linear momentum,
Conservation of angular momentum and rotation of rigid bodies in plane.
17
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Thermal Physics: Averages, probability and probability distributions, Thermal equilibrium and
macroscopic variables: Pressure of an ideal gas from Newton’s laws - the kinetic theory of gases.
Maxwell’s velocity distribution, Laws of Thermodynamics and the statistical origin of the second law
of thermodynamics, Application of thermodynamics: Efficiency of heat engines and air-conditioners,
Thermodynamics of batteries and rubber bands.
Recommended Book (s):
1. An Introduction to Mechanics, by Kleppner and Kolenkow
2. Physics for Scientists and Engineers with Modern Physics, by J. W. Jewett, R. A. Serway
3. Fundamentals of Physics, by Resnick, Halliday and Walker
4. Feynman Lecture Series, Vol. 1
2. Introduction to Physics II (PHY 102)
Vector Calculus: Fundamental vector operations, Vector calculus: Gradient, Divergence, Curl and related
fundamental theorems of vector calculus, Vector integration (line,surface and volume integrals), Divergence
theorem and Stoke’s theorem, Coordinate systems (Polar (2D), Spherical and Cylindrical (3D)). Electrostatics
- Electric field, divergence and curl of electric fields, electric potential, Work and Energy in electrostatics,
conductors and capacitors, Laplace’s equation of electrostatic potential in 1, 2 and 3 dimensions, Multipole
expansion of electrostatic potential, monopole and dipole terms, field due to electric dipole, polarization in
dielectrics, field of a polarized object, bound charges and its physical interpretation, electric displacement
vector and Gauss’s law in dielectrics, definitions of permittivity, susceptibility and dielectric constant.
Magnetostatics - Magnetic forces and Lorentz force law, charged particle in an electromagnetic field,
magnetic field due to steady current (Biot-Savart law), Divergence and Curl of B, Ampere’s law (differential
and integral form), magnetic dipole, forces and torque on a current carrying loop, magnetic field due to a
magnetic dipole, magnetic vector potential, effect of magnetic field on atomic orbits, magnetzation, field
of a magnetized object, bound currents and their physical, interpretation, auxiliary field H, Ampere’s law in
magnetized materials. Electrodynamics - Electromotive force, Ohm’s law, motional emf, Faraday’s law of
electromagnetic induction and induced electric field, self and mutual inductance, energy in magnetic fields,
Maxwell’s equations before and after Maxwell, displacement currents, work-energy theorem (Poynting’s
theorem) in electrodynamics, Poynting’s vector, continuity equation, electromagnetic waves in vacuum,
monochromatic plane electromagnetic waves and their representation. Wave Optics: Interference of
light waves: Young’s double slit experiment, displacement of fringes, Interference in thin films. Diffraction:
Fresnel’s and Fraunhofer’s class of diffraction, diffraction from single, double &amp; N- Slits, theory of
diffraction grating.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Introduction to Electrodynamics, D. J. Griffith
2. Physics for Scientists and Engineers with Modern Physics, J. W. Jewett and R. A. Serway
3. The Feynman Lecture on Physics 2 (2 nd Ed, 1985).
4. Electricity and Magnetism, Edward Mills Purcell
3. Mathematic I (MAT 103)
Review of high school calculus, Parametric curves (Vector functions): plotting, tangent, arc-length,
polar coordinates, derivatives and integrals, Functions of several variables: level curves and surfaces,
18 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
differentiation of functions of several variables, gradient, unconstrained and constrained optimization,
Double and triple integrals: integrated integrals, polar coordinates, cylindrical and spherical coordinates,
change of variables. Vector fields, divergence and curl, Line and surface integrals, Fundamental
Theorems of Green, Stokes and Gauss.
Recommended Book (s):
1. A Banner, The Calculus Lifesaver, Princeton University Press.
2. James Stewart, Essential Calculus – Early Transcendentals, Cengage.
3. G B Thomas and R L Finney, Calculus and Analytic Geometry, Addison- Wesley.
4. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Wiley
4. Mathematic II (MAT 104)
First order ODEs: separable, exact, linear. Second order ODEs: homogeneous and nonhomogeneous
linear, linear with constant coefficients, Wronskian, undetermined coefficients, variation of parameters.
Laplace transform: definition and inverse, linearity, shift, derivatives, integrals, initial value problems,
time shift, Dirac’s delta function and partial fractions, convolution, differentiation and integration of
transform. Matrices: operations, inverse, determinant, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, diagonalization.
Systems of ODEs: superposition principle, Wronskian, constant coefficient systems, phase plane,
critical points, stability
Recommended Book (s):
1. James Stewart, Essential Calculus – Early Transcendentals, Cengage.
2. Erwin Kreyszig, Advanced Engineering Mathematics, Wiley.
5. Introduction to Computing and Programming (CSD 101)
Introduction to Basic Fundamentals of Computers, Introduction to Programming, Identifiers and
Constants, Data Types and Operators, Logical Expressions and Conditional Statements, Loops, Arrays,
Functions, Scope of Variables, Pointers, Pointers and Arrays, Searching and Sorting in arrays, Strings,
Recursion, Structures, Unions and Bit Manipulation, File Processing, Introduction to Data Structures.
Lab Plan - Introduction to Linux, Editor, GCC Compiler and Debugger. Introduction to basic Linux
Commands, Programs based on Operators and Assignment Statements, Programs based on Control
Statements, Programs based on Loop Statements, Array Programming, Function Programming,
Programs based on Pointers, Call by Value and Call by Reference, Programs based on Recursion,
Programs based on Strings, File Input Output.
Recommended Book (s):
1. C, How to Program, 7th Edition, Paul Deitel, Harvey Deitel, PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. ISBN:
8120348273
2. Let Us C, 13th Edition, Yashavant Kanetkar, BPB Publications, ISBN: 978818333163
6. Engineering Mechanics (CED 101)
Introduction to Mechanics, Fundamental concepts of Mechanics, The Four Fundamental Forces of
Nature, Force Vectors, Force Systems: Two-Dimensional and Three-Dimensional Force Systems, Vector
Analysis of Force Systems, Rectangular Components, Moment, Couple, Force and Couple System,
19
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Resultant of Force-Couple System, Simple Distributed Loading and its Reduction to Point Load,
Equilibrium Conditions, System Isolation and Free-Body Diagram, Degree of Freedom, Constraints
and Statical Determinacy, Supports and Connections, Determination of Support Reactions. Forms
of Structures, Loads and Forces: Dead Load, Imposed Load and Forces, and Load Combinations,
Idealization of Structures, Simple Trusses, Plane Truss, Space Truss, The Method of Joints, The Method
of Sections, Frames and Machines, Arches and Cables, Internal Forces: Internal Loadings Developed
in Structural Members, Shear and Moment Equations and Diagrams, Relations Between Distributed
Load, Shear and Moment. Types of friction, Limiting friction, Laws of Friction, Static and Dynamic
Friction; Motion of Bodies, wedge friction, screw jack & differential screw jack. Centroid of simple
figures from first principle, centroid of composite sections; Centre of Gravity and its implications; Area
moment of inertia, Moment of inertia of plane sections from first principles, Theorems of moment
of inertia, Moment of inertia of standard sections and composite sections; Mass moment inertia of
circular plate, Cylinder, Cone, Sphere, Hook. Work and Energy, Principle of Virtual Work, Principle of
Virtual Work for a System of Connected Rigid Bodies, Conservative Forces, Potential Energy, Potential
Energy Criterion for Equilibrium, Stability of Equilibrium Configuration. Introduction, Free Vibration:
Undamped Free Vibration-Equation of Motion and its Solution, Damped Free Vibration- Equation of
Motion and its Solution, Forced Vibration: Harmonic Excitation, Base Excitation, Undamped Force
Vibration, Damped Force Vibration, Energy Methods.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Irving H. Shames (2006), Engineering Mechanics, 4th Edition, Prentice Hall
2. F. P. Beer and E. R. Johnston (2011), Vector Mechanics for Engineers, Vol I - Statics, Vol II, –
Dynamics, 9th Ed, Tata McGraw Hill
3. R.C. Hibbler (2006), Engineering Mechanics: Principles of Statics and Dynamics, Pearson Press.
4. J. L. Meriam and L.G. Kraige (2012), Engineering Mechanics, Vol I – Static, Vol II – Dynamics, 7th
Edition, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
7. Engineering Graphics (CED 102)
Introduction: Graphics as a tool to communicate ideas, Lettering and dimensioning, Types of Lines,
First and Third angle projections. Projection of points. Pictorial view. Projection of lines parallel to
both the planes. Parallel to one and inclined to other, Inclined to both the planes. Application to
practical problems. Projection of planes in simple position. Principal and auxiliary planes, Construction
of geometrical figures like pentagon and hexagon. Orthographic Projection: Principles of orthographic
projections, Isometric Projection: Principles of isometric projection. Introduction to AutoCAD: 2D
and 3D Modelling Introduction to SolidWorks. Introduction to 3D Printing. FDM hands-on. Lab work
would include completing Drawing Assignments on Sheets, and in the later part of the semester, on
AutoCAD.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Engg. Drawing by N D Bhatt
2. Engg. Drawing by Dhawan
8. Civil Engineering Systems and Sustainability (CED 104)
Introduction to Civil engineering systems, Structural Infrastructure systems: Foundations,
Skyscrapers, Schools, Bridges, Dams, Levees, and Retaining Walls, Transportation Infrastructure
20 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
systems: Introduction to transportation systems, road, rail, airport, port and harbor, Environmental
and Energy Infrastructure, Water Resources Infrastructure: dams, reservoirs, levees, and canals,
Engineering Economics , Needs for planning, Infrastructure planning, Building materials: Clay products
and alternatives like Fly-ash, Stone, stone tiles and stone dust blocks Wood and engineered wood,
Glass and glazing systems, ceramic tiles, vitrified tiles, insulation, Fine aggregate, Coarse aggregate,
Cement, Concrete, Precast items – flooring, roofing, walling system, Bitumen as damp proofing
materials, Paints, Plastics, Composites, nanotechnology applications, natural materials, soil and rock,
Sustainability, Role of civil engineer for sustainable development, Societal and Global Impact of
Infrastructure, Introduction to sustainable development goals, Smart city concept, clean city concept,
Safe city concept, Energy efficient buildings, recycling, Temperature and Sound control in buildings,
Security systems; Smart buildings.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Building Materials by S K Duggal, New Age International Publisher
2. Introduction to Civil Engineering by S S Bhavikatti and A K Roopa, New Age International Publisher
3. Introduction to Civil Engineering: A Student’s Guide to Academic and Professional Success by S. T
Mau and Sami Maalouf, Cognella, Inc Publishers
9. Engineering Hydrology (CED 203)
Hydrologic cycle, Types of precipitation, Forms of precipitation, Measurement of Rainfall, Frequency
analysis of point rainfall – Intensity, duration, frequency relationship, Probable maximum precipitation.
Abstraction from Precipitation and Losses: Losses from precipitation, Evaporation process,
Infiltration process, Infiltration capacity, Measurement of infiltration, Effective rainfall, W-Index
and φ – Index. Stream Flow Measurement: Determination of stream flow using various methods-
Direct determination, Indirect determination. Hydrographs: Runoff, Runoff characteristics, Discharge
formulae, characteristics of a Run off hydrograph, Factors affecting Hydrograph, Base flow separation,
Unit hydrograph, Derivation of unit hydrograph, S curve hydrograph, Unit hydrograph of different
deviations, Synthetic Unit Hydrograph, Mass Flow hydrograph, Instantaneous hydrograph. Floods
and Flood Routing: Flood peak estimation, Rational method, Empirical method, Unit hydrograph
method, Flood frequency studies, Recurrence interval, Gumbel’s method, Flood routing, Reservoir
flood routing, Muskingum’s Channel Routing, Flood control.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Subramanya, “Engineering Hydrology”, Tata McGraw-Hill Education, 2008.
2. Ven Tee Chow, David Maidment, Larry Mays, “Applied Hydrology”, 2nd Edition, McGraw-Hill
Companies, Incorporated, 2013.
3. Deodhar M. J., “Elementary Engineering Hydrology”, Pearson Education India, 2009.
4. Das, Ghanshyam, “Hydrology & Soil Conservation Engineering”, PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd., 2009.
5. Ray K. Linsley, Max Adam Kohler, Joseph L. H. Paulhus, “Hydrology for engineers”, Edition 3,
illustrated, McGraw-Hill series in water resources and environmental engineering, McGraw-Hill,
1982.
10. Elements of Surveying (CED 206)
Overviews and Introduction (Basics of Surveying): Overview of elements of surveying; Brief ideas
of technical terminologies and survey equipment; Fundamental concepts; Surveying measurements;
21
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Mapping and conventional signs. Linear Measurement (Chain and Tape Surveying): Chain survey;
Instruments (chains, tapes, ranging rods, etc.); Uses of cross staff and optical square; Offsets;
Obstacles in chaining. Compass Surveying: Prismatic compass; Surveyor’s compass; Bearing: whole
circle (W.C.B) and reduced bearing (R.B); Local attraction and its adjustments; Traversing. Plane Table
Surveying: Plane Table Instruments and Accessories; Merits and demerits; Methods; Orientation;
Two and three point problems; Errors in plane tabling. Theodolite Surveying: Study of theodolite,
Temporary and permanent adjustments; Measurement of horizontal and vertical angles; Overview on
Optical and Electronic theodolites. Traverse Surveying: Traverse Surveying; Tacheometric surveying;
Stadia method, Movable hair method; Trigonometric leveling and various methods. Levelling: Principle
and definition; Levelling instruments; Dumpy level; Auto and Digital level; Booking and reducing
levels; Curvature and refraction corrections; Bubble tube and its sensitiveness; Difficulties in
Levelling. Contouring: Contour survey; Definition, Characteristics of contours; Methods of contouring;
Interpolations; Uses of contour maps. Area and Volume Surveying: Areas and Volume computation;
Trapezoidal rule; Simpson’s rule; Other relevant methods for area and volume computation. EDM,
and Minor instrumentation: Introduction to Electro-Magnetic Distance Measurement (EDM); EDM
basic functions; Types of EDM instruments; Total Station Surveys. Minor Instruments: Box sexant;
Planimeter; Pantagraph; Clinometer.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Punmia, B. C., “Surveying” Vol I and II, Laxmi Pub (1994).
2. Kanetkar T.P., “Surveying and Levelling”, Vols. I and II, United Book Corporation, Pune (1994).
3. Duggal, S. K., “Surveying” Vol 1, Tata, McGraw Hill (2004).
4. S. K. Roy, Fundamentals of Surveying, PHI.
11. Hydraulics Engineering (CED 207)
Introduction: open channel flow and its classifications, and properties, types of channel, energy and
momentum principles, Critical flow computation and its applications, transitions with sub critical and
super critical flows,), Specific energy and specific energy curve, specific force, and pressure distribution
in open channels. Applications of Bernoulli‘s equation to open channel flow. Uniform Flow: Chezy‘s
formula, Manning‘s formula, Manning roughness coefficient, equivalent roughness, hydraulically
efficient channel cross-section (most economical section), Velocity distribution in open channels,
Normal Depth and its computation, flow in compound channel. Notches and Weir- Definitions, types
of notches and weir, broad crested weir, sharp crested weir, triangular notch, rectangular notch, etc.
Gradually varied flow – Theory and analysis, gradually-varied flow computations in prismatic channels,
classification of flow profile, feature of flow profiles, back water curve and afflux. Rapidly varied flow-
Theory of hydraulic jump and its application, evaluation of jump elements in rectangular and non-
rectangular channel, location of jump on horizontal floor, channel controls and transitions.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Electrical Machinery P. S. Bhimbra, Khanna publishers, 2012.
2. Generalized Theory of Electrical Machines, P. S. Bhimbra. Khanna publishers, 1998.
3. Electrical Machinery, Fitzgerald and Kingsley, McGraw- Hill Higher education, 7th edition, 2013.
4. Electrical Machines, D. P. Kothari and I. J. Nagrath, McGraw- Hill Higher education, 4th edition,
2010.
22 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
5. John E. Gribbin, “Introduction to Hydraulics &amp; Hydrology: With Applications for Stormwater
Management”, Delmar Cengage Learning; 2 edition (September 11, 2001).
6. Hubert Chanson, “The Hydraulics of Open Channel Flow: An Introduction”, Butterworth
Heinemann; 0002- edition (July 15, 2004)
12. Building Information Modelling (CED 214)
Current AEC (Architecture, engineering and construction) practices: The construction process, Role
of Architects and Civil engineers, Structural designers, Site engineers, Construction management,
costing and estimation, drawing-based design information, the impact of poor information on design,
procurement, and construction management. Introduction to BIM: Master builder and information
modelling, the digital revolution, the origin of BIM in computer aided design, BIM method or tool,
Benefits and challenges in BIM, Various commercial Software packages, Case studies. BIM tools
and parametric modelling: BIM an object oriented parametric modelling, beyond parametric shapes,
Strength and limitations of object-based parametric modelling, Common data environment, BIM
environment, platforms and tools. BIM for Architects and Engineers: Scope of design services, BIM in
design process, building object models and libraries. Future prospective of BIM and case studies: The
development of BIM up to today, current trends, Drivers of change and BIM impacts, case studies
Recommended Book (s):
1. Eastman, Charles M., et al. BIM handbook: A guide to building information modelling for owners,
managers, designers, engineers and contractors. John Wiley & Sons, 2011.
2. Eynon, John. Construction manager’s BIM handbook. John Wiley & Sons, 2016.
3. Daniotti, Bruno, et al. BIM-Based Collaborative Building Process Management. Springer, 2020.
4. Garber, Richard. BIM design: realising the creative potential of building information modelling.
John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
5. Crotty, Ray. The impact of building information modelling: transforming construction. Routledge,
2013.
13. Mechanics of Solid (CED 215)
Introduction to Mechanics of Deformable Bodies: A Short Review of Methods of Statics, Forces
and Moments Transmitted by Slender Members: Differential Equilibrium Relationships, Singularity
Functions and Three Dimensional Problems, Normal Stress and Strain, Shear Stress and Strain,
Bearing Stress in Connections, Stress on an Oblique Plane under Axial Loading Conditions, Stress
under General Loading Condition, Allowable Stresses and Allowable Loads, Design for Axial Loads and
Direct Shear, Statically Determinate Structures, Statically Indeterminate Structures. Concept of Stress
and Strain- Traction Vector, Stress Tensor, Plane Stress, Equilibrium of a Differential Element in Plane
Stress, Stress Components Associated with Arbitrarily Oriented Faces in Plane Stress, Mohr’s Circle
Representation of Plane Stress, Mohr’s Circle Representation of a General State of Stress, Analysis
of Deformation, Definition of Strain Components, Relation Between Strain and Displacement in
Plain Strain, Strain Components Associated with Arbitrary Sets of Axes, Mohr’s Circle Representation
of Plane Strain, Mohr’s Circle Representation of General State of Strain, Measurement of Strains.
Constitutive Relationships - The Tensile Test, Idealizations of Stress-Strain Curves, Elastic Stress-Strain
Relations, Thermal Strain, Complete Equation of Elasticity, Strain Energy in an Elastic Body, Stress
Concentration, Anisotropic Elasticity, Criteria for Initial Yielding, Behaviour Beyond Initial Yielding,
23
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Introduction to Fracture and Fatigue, Plasticity and Creep. Torsion - Torsional Deformations of a Circular
Bar, Circular Bars of Linearly Elastic Materials, Non- uniform Torsion, Stresses and Strains in Pure
Shear, Transmission of Power by Circular Shafts, Statically Indeterminate Torsional Members, Strain
Energy in Torsion and Pure Shear, Thin-Walled Tubes. Stress Due to Bending - Bending Deformations
of a Symmetrical Beam, Pure Bending and Non uniform Bending, Curvature of a Beam, Longitudinal
Strains in Beams, Normal Stresses in Beams (Linearly Elastic Materials), Design of Beams for Bending
Stresses, Non prismatic Beams, Shear Stresses in Beams of Rectangular Cross Section, Shear Stresses
in Beams of Circular Cross Section, Shear Stresses in the Webs of Beams with Flanges, Built-Up Beams
and Shear Flow, Beams with Axial Loads, Stress Concentrations in Bending, Bending of Unsymmetrical
Beams, The Shear-Center Concept. Deflections of Beams - Differential Equations of the Deflection
Curve, Deflections by Integration of the Bending- Moment Equation, Deflections by Integration of
the Shear-Force and Load Equations, Method of Superposition, Moment-Area Method, Nonprismatic
Beams, Strain Energy in Bending, Castigliano’s Theorem, Types of Statically Indeterminate Beams,
Analysis by the Differential Equations of the Deflection Curve, Method of Superposition, Temperature
Effects. Stability of Equilibrium: Buckling of Column - Buckling and Stability, Columns with Pinned Ends,
Columns with Other Support Conditions Columns with Eccentric Axial Loads, The Secant Formula for
Columns, Elastic and Inelastic Column Behaviour, Inelastic Buckling, Design Formulas for Columns.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Stephan H. Crandall and Norman C. Dahl, An Introduction to The Mechanics of Solids, McGraw
Hill
2. F. P. Beer and E. R. Johnston, Mechanics of Materials, Tata McGraw Hill
3. James M. Gere and Barry J. Goodno, Mechanics of Materials, 7th Edition, Cenagage Learning.
14. Mechanics of Fluid (CED 216)
Fundamental Concepts of properties such as Mass density, weight density, specific gravity, specific
volume, viscosity, compressibility and elasticity, surface tension, capillarity, vapor pressure, types
of fluids, basic concepts applicable to fluid mechanics. Fluid statics: Pascal’s law, hydrostatic law,
pressure variation in fluids at rest. Absolute, atmospheric, gauge pressure, measurement of pressure
using manometers. Total pressure and centre of pressure, total pressure on horizontal plane surface,
vertical plane surface, Inclined plane surface, centre of pressure for vertical plane surface and for
inclined plane surface, practical applications of total pressure and centre of pressure on dams, gates,
and tanks. Fluid kinematics: Types of fluid flow, description of flow pattern, Lagrangian methods,
Eulerian method, continuity equation, velocity and acceleration of fluid particles, velocity potential
and stream function, streamline, streak line, path line, equipotential lines and flow net, uses of flow
net, rotational and irrotational motions, circulation and vorticity . Fluid dynamics: Control volume and
control surface, Forces acting on fluid in motion, NavierStokes Equation, Euler’s Equation of motion,
Integration of Euler’s equations of motion, Bernoulli’s Theorem and its derivation, Bernoulli’s equation
for compressible fluid and real fluid, Flow Measurement Devices: Practical applications of Bernoulli’s
Equation - Venturimeter, Orifice meter, nozzle meter, pitot tube, Flow through pipes: Loss of head
through pipes, Darcy-Weisbach equation, minor and major losses. Hydraulic gradient line and energy
gradient line, pipes in series, equivalent pipes, pipes in parallel, flow through laterals, flow through
branched pipes, three reservoir problem, siphon. Dimensional analysis and similitude: Dimensional
homogeneity, Buckingham’s π theorem, important dimensional numbers and their significance,
24 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
geometric, Kinematic and dynamic similarity, model studies. Boundary Layer Analysis: Development
of boundary layer over flat surfaces. Boundary layer thickness.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Fluid Mechanics: Including Hydraulic Machines, by A. K. Jain; Khanna Publishers; 2008.
2. Hydraulics and Fluid Mechanics Including Hydraulics Machines, by P. N. Modi; Standard Book
House; 2009. , ISBN: 8189401262, ISBN-13: 9788189401269.
3. Fluid Mechanics by R. K. Rajput; S. Chand; 2011, ISBN: 81-219-1666-6
4. Fluid Mechanics, by Frank White; Tata McGraw Hill Education Pvt. Ltd.; 2011.
5. Fluid Mechanics and Machinery by C.S.P.Ojha et.al, Oxford University Press, 2010, ISBN: 0-19-
569963-7.
6. Fluid Mechanics by R. C. Hibbeler, Pearson Press, 2017, ISBN: 978-93-325-4701
7. Fluid Mechanics by Streeter, V.L. and Benjamin, W.E., McGraw-Hill.
15. Computational Methods (CED 217)
Introduction - Mathematical Modelling and Engineering Problem Solving, Approximations and round-
off errors, Significant figures, Accuracy and precision, Errors, Round-Off errors, Error propagation and
condition number of a problem, condition number of an algorithm, Truncation errors and the Taylor
series. Solving Non-Linear Equations - Introduction, solving equation using an iterative method, The
method of successive bisection, The method of false position, Newton-Raphson iterative method,
The secant method, The method of successive approximations, Comparison of iterative methods,
Solving polynomial equations, Solving simultaneous nonlinear equations. System of Linear Equations
- Introduction, The Guass elimination method, Pivoting, Ill conditioned equations, Refinement of
the solution obtained by Guass elimination, The Guass-Seidel iterative method, An algorithm to
implement the Guass-Seidel method, Comparison of direct and iterative methods. Interpolation
and Regression - Lagrange interpolation, Lagrange interpolation, Difference tables, Truncation error
in interpolation, Spline interpolation, Linear regression, Algorithm for linear regression, Polynomial
regression, Fitting exponential and trigonometric functions, Taylor series representation, Chebyshev
series. Differentiation and Integration - Introduction, Numerical differentiation, Numerical integration,
Simpson’s rule, Truncation Error in integration formulae, Algorithms for integration of tabulated
function, Algorithms for integrating a known function, Guassian quadrature formulae, Comparison
of integration formulae. Numerical Solution of Differential Equations - Introduction, Euler’s method,
Taylor series method, Picard’s method, Runge-Kutta methods, Runge-Kutta fourth order formula,
Predictor-corrector method, Higher order differential equations, Comparison of predictor-corrector
and Runge-Kutta methods.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Rajaraman (2018), Computer Oriented Numerical Methods, 4th Edition, Prentice Hall
2. Steven C. Chapra and Raymond P Canale (2015), Numerical Methods for Engineers, 7th Ed,
McGraw Hill
3. Jaan Kiusalaas (2010), Numerical Methods in Engineering with Python, 2nd Ed, Cambridge
University Press
16. Risk and Reliability Analysis (CED 218)
Introduction to reliability, Need for reliability evaluation, Measures of reliability, Sources of
uncertainty, Steps in the modelling of uncertainty, Mathematics of probability, Axioms of probability,
25
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Multiplication rule, Theorem of total probability, Bayes’ theorem. Steps in quantifying randomness,
Analytical models to quantify randomness, Multiple random variables, Commonly used probability
distributions, Continuous random variables: Normal or Gaussian distribution, Log normal random
variable, Beta distribution, Discrete random variables: Binomial distribution, Geometric distribution,
Return period, Poisson distribution, Exponential distribution, Combination of continuous and discrete
random variables: Hypergeometric and Hyperbinomial distribution, Extreme value distribution.
Determination of probability distribution: Probability papers, Construction of probability paper,
Statistical tests, Estimation of parameters of distribution: Method of moments, Method of maximum
likelihood, Interval estimation of mean and variance: Interval estimation for the mean with known
variance, Lower upper confidence limit for the mean with known variance, Interval estimation for
the mean with unknown variance, Lower and upper confidence limit for the mean with unknown
variance, Sample sizes in estimating the confidence interval of mean, Interval Estimation for the
variance. Randomness in response variable -The known functional relationship between the response
and a single basic random variable, Response as a known function of multiple random variables,
partial and approximate solutions, Multiple random variables with unknown relationship, Regression
analysis: Simple linear regression analysis, Coefficient of determination, Residual analysis, Multiple
linear regression, Non-linear models. Fundamentals of reliability analysis Introduction, Deterministic
and probabilistic approaches, Risk and safety factors concept, Risk-based design concept and the
development of the risk-based design format: Load and resistance normal variables- single load case,
Load and resistance normal variables-multiple load case, Load and resistance lognormal variables-
single load case, Load and resistance lognormal variables-multiple load case, Fundamental concept
of reliability analysis, First Order Reliability Methods (FORM): First-Order Second-Moment Method
(FOSM) or MVFOSM Method, AFOSM Method for normal variables (Hasofer-Lind Method), AFOSM
Methods for nonnormal variables, Risk-based design format using FORM.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Risk and Reliability Analysis, Vijay P. Singh, Sharad K. Jain, Aditya Tyagi, ASCE Press.
2. An Introduction to the Basics of Reliability and Risk Analysis, Enrico Zio, World Scientific.
3. Probability, Reliability and Statistical Methods in Engineering Design, Achintya Haldar, Sankaran
Mahadevan, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
17. Concrete Technology (CED 219)
Concrete Materials - Types of material, Cement : cement production, composition, and properties;
cement chemistry; Types of cements; special cements. Aggregates: mineralogy; properties, types of
aggregates tests and standards. Brief idea about laboratory tests meant for cement and aggregate.
Chemical and mineral admixtures: Admixtures - structure properties, and effects on concrete
properties. Introduction to supplementary cementing materials and pozzolans. Fly ash, blast furnace
slag, silica fume, and metakaolin - their production, properties and effects on concrete properties.
Other mineral additives - reactive and inert, water reducers, air entrainers, set controllers. Concrete
Mix Design -factors influencing mix proportion - Mix design by ACI method and I.S. code method -
Design of high strength concrete. Properties of fresh and hardened concrete- Workability, Factors
affecting workability, type of tests. Water cement ratio, gain of strength with age, effect of maximum
size of aggregate, relationship between compressive and tensile, strength, high strength concrete,
high performance concrete. Elasticity, shrinkage and creep of concrete. Durability of concrete -
Introduction to durability; relation between durability and permeability. Chemical attack of concrete;
26 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
corrosion of steel rebars; other durability issues. Special concrete - Lightweight concrete. high density
concrete, hot weather and cold weather concreting, polymer concrete.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Concrete Technology: M. L. Gambhir
2. Properties of concrete: A.M. Neville
3. Concrete Technology: M. S. Shetty
18. Structural Analysis (CED 220)
Introduction- Degree of indeterminacy and stability of structures; Drawing the influence lines
using direct equilibrium; Influence lines for beams, girders and trusses. Analysis (displacement) of
Statically Indeterminate Beams Energy methods, Theorem of Three moments, Two hinged arches
(Reaction, horizontal thrust, Effect of yielding of supports, Temperature change). Analysis of Statically
Indeterminate Structures Moment distribution method: Introduction, method development, solution
of continuous beam, effect of settlement and rotation of support, frames with or without lateral sway.
Slope deflection method: Introduction, development of slope deflection equations; Application to
continuous beams and frames with and without lateral sway. Method of Consistent deformation (Force
method): Continuous beams, Non-sway frames, Sway frames. Matrix Stiffness Method Introduction,
member stiffness matrix; Transformation, compatibility and equilibrium, assemblage of structural
stiffness matrix; Imposing support conditions; Banded property of structural stiffness matrix.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Kassimali, Structural analysis, Cengage Learning, Inc.
2. R. C. Hibbeler, Structural Analysis, Pearson Publications.
3. S. Reddy, Basic Structural Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill Publications
19. Transportation Engineering - I (CED 304)
Introduction: Breadth and scope of Transportation Engineering, modes of transportation and their
comparison, effect of transportation systems on economy, impact on environment; Road transport
Characteristics, Classification of roads, Road development plans in India, network patterns. Traffic
Engineering: Traffic Studies, Origin-Destination studies, speed and delay studies, accident analysis,
volume studies, passenger car equivalent, etc.; Traffic control Devices, marking, Signs, Signals,
Regulations; Speed-flow- density relationship, Greenshields model, signal timing estimation, Capacity
and Level-of- Service analysis. Roadway Geometry: Road, road user and vehicle characteristics, factors
affecting design standards, cross-section elements, Stopping and overtaking sight distances, Road
alignment, site selection, plan evaluation, Horizontal alignment, vertical alignment, design of summit
and valley curves. Materials: Sub-grade soil, classification, group index, sub-grade soil stabilization;
Aggregate, physical properties, mechanical properties, test on aggregates; Bituminous material,
classification, tests on bitumen. Pavement Design: Necessity of pavement, types of pavements &amp;
characteristics, design parameters, wheel loads and axle loads, tyre pressure, load repetitions, ESWL;
rigid and flexible pavement design, stresses in rigid pavement. Lab Work based on various testing
methods for materials such as soil, aggregates, and bitumen as well as exercises based on traffic
engineering concepts.
27
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Recommended Book (s):
1. S. K. Khanna and C. E. G. Justo, “Highway Engineering”,9th Edition, Nem Chand and Brothers
(2011).
2. L.R. Kadiyali, “Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning”,Khanna Publishers (2011).
3. Paul H. Wright and Karen K. Dixon, “Highway Engineering”,7th Edition, Wiley India (2012).
4. Yang H. Huang, “Pavement Analysis and Design”, Pearson Education India.
5. Ajay K. Duggal and Vijay P. Puri, “Laboratory Manual in Highway Engineering”, New Age
International.
20. Design of Reinforced Cement Concrete (RCC) Structures (CED 305)
Introduction to reinforced concrete, loads and load combinations, design philosophies. Flexural analysis
and design of singly and doubly reinforced beams. Flexural analysis and design of flanged beams.
Shear, diagonal tension and torsion in beams. Mid-term examination (as per University Examination
Timetable). Bond, anchorage, development length, curtailments of reinforcement bars. Design of
slabs, design of staircases. Design of columns. Design of footings. Limit states of serviceability. Final
examination (as per University Examination Timetable).
Recommended Book (s):
1. N. Subramanian, Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures, Oxford University Press, 2013.
2. J. N. Bandyopadhyay, Design of Concrete Structures, Prentice Hall India, 2011.
3. H. Nilson, D. Darwin and C. W. Dolan, Design of Concrete Structures, Tata McGraw Hill, 2010.
4. E. G. Nawy, Reinforced Concrete - A Fundamental Approach, Prentice Hall, 2003.
5. M. L. Gambhir, Fundamentals of Reinforced Concrete Design, Prentice Hall India, 2006.
6. S. U. Pillai and D. Menon, Reinforced Concrete Design, Tata McGraw Hill, 2009.
7. P. C. Varghese, Limit State Design of Reinforced Concrete, Prentice Hall India, 2008.
8. K. Jain, Reinforced Concrete: Limit State Design, Nem Chand and Bros., 1999.
9. S. N. Sinha, Reinforced Concrete Design, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2nd Edition, 2002.
10. N. Krishna Raju, Design of Reinforced Concrete Structure (IS: 456-2000), CBS Publishers &amp;
Distributors, 2008.
11. R. Park and W. L. Gamble, Reinforced Concrete Slabs, John Wiley &amp; Sons, 2002. XVII.
Indian Standard Codes of Practice:
1. IS 456: 2000 – Code of practice for plain and reinforced concrete, 2000.
2. IS 875: 1987 (Part 1 to Part 5) – Code of practice for design loads (other than earthquake) for
buildings and structures, 1987.
3. SP 16: 1980 – Design Aids for Reinforced Concrete, 1980.
4. SP 24: 1983 – Explanatory Handbook on Indian Standard Code of Practice for Plain and Reinforced
Concrete, 1983.
5. SP 34: 1987 – Handbook of Concrete Reinforcement and Detailing, 1987.
21. Foundation Engineering and Design (CED 306)
Geotechnical investigation for determination of physical and engineering properties of subsurface
soils. This will include planning and conducting field investigations and laboratory testing. Theory of
lateral earth pressure; Methods of analyses; Bearing capacity theories; Design of shallow foundations:
strip footings, isolated footings, combined footings, rafts; Design of deep foundations: single piles,
28 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
pile groups, pile caps, caissons, vertical uplift and lateral capacity; Design of retaining structures: rigid
and flexible walls, coffer dams, diaphragm walls, braced cuts; Foundations in difficult grounds; Ground
improvement techniques; Soil reinforcement. The lectures include an overview of geotechnical
site investigation methods and in situ tests used to estimate engineering parameters. The course
emphasizes the importance of parameter selection in calculations of ultimate and serviceability limit
state calculations for both shallow and deep foundations, and discusses methods of soil improvement.
The section on earth retaining structures considers systems ranging from gravity walls to composite
construction (reinforced earth), from structural support to field monitoring of excavations (bracing,
tieback anchors etc.).
Recommended Book (s):
1. J. E. Bowles, Foundation Analysis and Design, McGraw Hill, 1996.
2. Braja M. Das, Shallow Foundations: Bearing Capacity and Settlement, CRC Press, 1999.
3. Braja M. Das, Principles of Foundation Engineering, Cengage Learning India Pvt Ltd, 2013.
4. P. C. Varghese, Foundation Engineering, PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd., 2009.
5. V. N. S. Murthy, Advanced Foundation Engineering, CBS Publishers &amp; Distibutors, 2010.
6. M. R. Hausmann, Engineering Principles of Ground Modification, McGraw Hill, 1990.
7. R. B. Peck, W. E. Hanson and T. H. Thornburn, Foundation Engineering, John Wiley &amp; Sons,
1974.
8. K. Terzaghi, R. B. Peck and G. Mesri, Soil Mechanics in Engineering Practice, John Wiley &amp;
Sons, 1996.
9. K. R. Arora, Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering: Geotechnical Engineering, Standard
Publishers Distributors, 1992.
22. Estimating, Costing and Project Management (CED 424)
Introduction to Construction Projects, stakeholders, phases in a project. Construction Economics.
Client’s Estimation of Project Cost. Construction Contract, Cost estimating and bidding- Contractor’s
perspective: material estimates, labour and equipment costs. Construction Planning, Project selection
using time value of money concept, Project planning and network analysis-PERT, CPM, and Precedence
Network. Resource scheduling, Time Cost trade off. Project Monitoring and Control system, Time
-cost monitoring and control using S-curve and earned value analysis. Construction Claims, Disputes,
and Project Closure. Introduction to use of project management software.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Bernard W. Taylor III. - Introduction to Management Science&quot; (10 th edition, 2009),
PEARSON - Prentice Hall.
2. Meredith, Wong, Woodhead and Wortman. &quot;Design and Planning of Engineering
Systems&quot; (2 nd edn, Prentice Hall, 1985).
3. Kumar Neeraj Jha. “Construction Project Management”, Pearson Education (2011).
4. K. K. Chitkara. “Construction Project Management : Planning, Scheduling and Controlling 2nd
Edition”, Tata McGraw - Hill Education.
5. Dutta, B.N “Estimation and Costing”, UBS Publisher.
6. M. Chakraborti Rangwala S. C. “Elements of Estimating and Costing” Charotar Publishing Pvt Ltd.
Anand. (1998).
29
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
23. Environmental Engineering (CED 308)
Introduction to water and waste water engineering: water and wastewater quality enhancement-
philosophy of treatment, removal of turbidity and pathogens, IS standards for drinking water supply.
Water and waste water quantity estimation: Water consumption rate, population forecasting
methods for estimation of water demands. Water and wastewater characteristics: Sources of raw
water, physical and chemical characteristics, Biological aspects, kinetic aspects of BOD, COD and
other characteristics. Unit operations and processes of water treatment systems: Briefs of different
operations and processes taking place during water treatment. Sedimentation: Discrete Particles,
average settling velocity, designing circular settling basin, tube settlers or inclined plate settling.
Coagulation and flocculation: colloidal stability, energy barrier-net attractive force, flocculation, design
of flocculators. Softening and filtration: lime and soda ash requirement, Filtration, types of filters, filter
washing, design of filters. Disinfection: Mechanism, Mechanism of Chlorine disinfection, Inhibition of
respiratory enzymes. Introduction to domestic waste-water treatment: Waste-water management,
schematic of waste-water treatment plant, primary, secondary and tertiary treatments, system of
sanitation, sewage appurtenances, sewage and storm water pumping stations, quantity estimation of
sewage and storm water, hydraulic design of sewers and storm water. Physical treatment processes:
Flow equalization, aeration, screening, design of fine screens, grit, effect of grit, grit removal facility,
skimming tank, water quality and estimation of organic content. Waste water treatment analysis:
Introduction to microbiology, biological processes. Activated sludge process and lagoons. Attached
growth aerobic process. Trickling filters and rotating biological contractors. Sequential batch reactor.
Anaerobic treatment. Anaerobic process-UASB reactor. Membrane technology for waste-water
treatment. Introduction to water and waste water engineering.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Howard S. Peavy, Donald R. Rowe, and George Tchobanoglous “Environmental Engineering”,
McGraw-Hill Book Co.,
2. Arcadio Sincero, and Pacquiao Sincero. “Environmental Engineering: A design approach”, PHI
Learning Pvt Ltd.,
3. Metcalf and Eddy “Inc., Wastewater Engineering, Treatment and Reuse.” McGraw-Hill Higher
Education.
4. Masters, Gilbert M., and Wendell Ela. “Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science.”
PHI Learning Pvt Ltd.,
5. Santosh Kumar Garg, “Water Supply Engineering” Khanna Publishers.
6. Santosh Kumar Garg, “Environmental Engineering: Sewage Disposal and Air Pollution Engineering”
Khanna Publishers.
7. B. C. Punmia, Arun Kumar Jain, Ashok Kumar Jain “Water Supply Engineering”, Laxmi Publications.
24. Introduction to Remote Sensing and GIS (CED 310)
Introduction to Remote Sensing: Definition of Remote Sensing, History and scope of remote sensing,
Electromagnetic Radiation (EMR) and atmospheric windows, Types of remote sensing. Thermal
Emission of Radiation, Black body radiation, Radiation Principles: Plank’s Law, Stephen Boltezman
law, Wien’s displacement law, Kirchoffs Law, Spectral signatures, Reflectance characteristics of Earths
cover types. Satellite platforms, sensors and resolutions: Platforms: Airborne and Space borne, Sensors:
Passive and Active, resolutions across track and along the track scanning, Optical sensors, Thermal
scanners, and Microwave radar. Aerial Photography Satellite missions and image characteristics:
Landsat series SPOT series, IRS satellite series, NOAA and MODIS series, etc. Image resolution:
Spatial (IFOV), Spectral, Radiometric and Temporal, Image Preprocessing: radiometric, atmospheric
30 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
and geometric corrections. Application Studies: Applications of Remote sensing in Environmental
monitoring and assessment, Applications of Remote sensing in Disaster Management, Land use/ Land
Cover Analysis. Concepts on GIS: Definition, Basics of GIS and History, Geographic objects: point,
line, area and their computer. Representation, Applications of GIS in various sectors. GIS Database
(types, structures) and data Model, Geographic information and spatial data types (Map, Attributes,
Image data). Data formats and Models: Raster data formats, vector data formats, advantages and
disadvantages of raster and vector data formats. Data acquisition and analysis: Data acquisition (Inputs
from RS imagery, GPS), Data entry &amp; preparations (input, editing and attributing). Map scanning
and digitizing, data conversion, linking of spatial and non-spatial data. Data manipulation and Spatial
Data Analysis (Vector/Raster Geoprocessing)- Buffering, Viewshed Analysis, Raster/Vector Overlay
Analysis, Map Algebra Introduction to GIS software and Case studies, Issues in spatial data quality,
introduction to metadata and its importance. GIS Software, Introduction to Open Source GIS
Recommended Book (s):
1. Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation, 6th edition, T. Lillesand, R. Kiefer and J. Chipman, John
Wiley.
2. Remote Sensing: Principles and Interpretation, 3rd edition, by: F. F. Sabins, W. H. Freeman &amp;
Co.; 1996, ISBN: 0-71- 672442-1.
3. Burrough, P.A. and McDonnell, R.A. (1998). Principles of Geographic Information System, Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
4. Concepts and Techniques of Geographic Information Systems. (Author: YEUNG, ALBERT K. W.,
LO, C. P.) ISBN: 978-81- 203-3914- 9, Edition: 2nd Edition, PHI Learning, India.
25. Machine Learning for Civil Engineering (CED 323)
Introduction; Historical context; Need of ML in industry; ML in modern civil engineering; Real world
applications in diverse fields; Data representation: Time series and Structured/Unstructured data;
Forms of learning: Supervised, Unsupervised and Reinforcement learning; Understanding the terms:
Artificial intelligence, Machine learning, Deep learning, Data mining, Analytics and Data science.
Statistical learning Introduction; Bias and Variance; Cross-Validation; Mean square error; Data sampling;
Precision-Recall Curves, F-score; Probability distributions; Normal distribution; Bayes theorem; Naive
Bayes Classifier. Supervised learning- Introduction; Linear regression; Logistic regression; k-Nearest
Neighbour (k-NN) classifier; Neural networks learning; Support vector machines (SVMs); Applications
to structural damage detection, soil classification, etc. Convolutional Neural Networks- Introduction
to convolutional neural networks; Neuron models; Activation functions; Single layer and Multilayer
networks; Applications to camera-based classification and object detection related to structural
health monitoring, vehicle detection, pavement distress detection, etc. Unsupervised clustering-
Introduction; Clustering; Cluster analysis; Hierarchical clustering; K-means clustering; Density based
clustering; Spectral clustering; Data transformation: Principal component analysis; Applications on
transportation mode inference, level of service of roads, etc. Understanding machine learning by
application- Using concepts of machine learning in small sized projects using tools such as Google Co
Labs, MATLAB, Anaconda and Weka etc.
Recommended Book (s):
1. M. Gopal (2022), Applied Machine Learning, McGraw Hill Education (India) Private Limited, 2nd
Edition.
2. James-A. Goulet (2020), Probabilistic Machine Learning for Civil Engineers, The MIT Press,
Illustrated Edition.
31
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
3. O. Theobald (2017), Machine Learning For Absolute Beginners, Scatterplot Press, 2nd edition.
4. Andreas C. Müller, Sarah Guido (2016), Introduction to Machine Learning with Python, O’Reilly
Media, Inc., First Edition.
26. Geotechnical Engineering (CED 325)
Origin and Classification of Soils – Soil Origin, Soil classification, Criteria for classifying soil, classification
on the basis of grain size, classification on the basis of plasticity, Symbols and graphic representation,
Classified soil and its engineering properties, Three phase system, Weight relationships, Volume
relationships, Density and unit weight relationships, Inter-relationships. The Effective Stress Principle
– Measurable stresses, Nature of effective stress, Distribution of effective stress with depth, Influence
on effective stress of a shift in the water table. Permeability-soil type, void ratio, soil structure,
effective stress, Darcy’s law, Constant head permeameter, Falling head permeameter. Flow Analysis
– One Dimensional Steady State Flow, Flow through Homogeneous deposit, Flow through layered
systems, Effective stress under steady state one- dimensional flow, Seepage force, Downward flow,
Upward flow, Quick condition, Two-dimensional steady state flow – Laplace equation, Flow nets,
confined flow, unconfined flow, determining pore water pressures under two dimensional flow,
Radial flow. Compressibility- effective stress, Normally consolidated and Over consolidated Clay.
Terzaghi’s One-dimensional Consolidation theory, Effective stress distribution in a compressible layer
during consolidation, Consolidation and settlement, Determining coefficients of compressibility, and
consolidation, Limitations in predicting consolidation behavior, Amount of consolidation, time of
consolidation. Shear Strength of Soils – Measurement of shear strength, Mohr’s circle, Types of Triaxial
compression tests, Shear stress, shear strength and the Triaxial test, Stress-Strain behavior of sands,
Stress-Strain behavior of clays, Concepts of failure, Stress conditions at failure in terms of total stresses,
Stress conditions at failure in terms of effective stresses, Relationships among stresses at failure,
Cohesion and Friction, Pore Water Pressure Parameters, Shear strength and strength parameters,
Effective stress-strength parameters – a function of soil type, Effective stress-strength parameters –
a function of stress history and stress range, Behavior of Overconsolidated Clays, Behavior of sands
at high stresses, Effective stress analysis, Total stress analysis. Slope Stability Analysis – Stability of
Infinite Slopes, Stability of finite slopes, Stability numbers, Method of slices, The Swedish method of
slices, The critical failure surface, Non-circular failure surfaces, Two-wedge method.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Shashi K Gulhati, and Manoj Datta, Geotechnical Engineering, McGraw-Hill Companies
2. Braja M. Das (2010). Principles of Geotechnical Engineering (7th Edition), Cengage Gopal Ranjan
and A. S. R. Rao, Basic and Applied Soil Mechanics, PHI
27. Water Resources Engineering (CED 326)
Introduction: Necessity and Importance of Irrigation, types of Irrigation, Duty and delta, factors
affecting duty, depth and frequency of Irrigation, irrigation efficiencies. Canals: Classification of canals,
design of Irrigation canals by Kennedy’s and Lacey’s theories, balancing depth of cutting, canal lining.
Diversion Head works: Types of Diversion head works-diversion and storage head works, weirs and
barrages, layout of diversion head works, components. Bligh’s creep theory, Khosla’s theory. Canal
structures: types of falls and their location, design principles Cross Drainage works: types, selection
of site, design principles of aqueduct, siphon aqueduct and super passage. Types of dams, merits and
demerits, factors affecting selection of type of dam, factors governing selecting site for dam, types
of reservoirs, selection of site for reservoir, zones of storage of a reservoir, reservoir yield, Spillways:
types of spillways.
32 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Recommended Book (s):
1. Irrigation and Water Power Engineering by Punmia, B. C., Lal, P. B. B, Jain, A. K., Jain, A. K., Laxmi
Publications
2. Irrigation Engineering And Hydraulic Structures by Garg, S. K., Khanna Publishers
3. Irrigation, Water Power and Water Resources Engineering Arora, K. R, Standard Publisher
Distributors
4. Elements of Water Resources Engineering by Duggal, K. N. and Soni, J. P., New Age International
5. Irrigation and Water Resources Engineering by Aswa, G. L., New Age International
6. Water Resources Engineering : Principles and Practice by Murthy, Satya N. Challa, New Age
International
7. Irrigation Water Resources and Water Power Engineering by Modi, P. N, Standard Book House
28. Sustainable and Resilient Infrastructure (CED 327)
Introduction to Infrastructure Sustainability and Resilience, Sustainability impacts of infrastructure
systems, Infrastructure design and operation principles, Infrastructure types and life cycle phases,
Variables and processes in the infrastructure sustainability, Construction materials and methods,
Infrastructure aging, Stakeholders and contributions, Consequences of climate change on infrastructure
sustainability performance, Climate change impacts on the life cycle impacts and resiliency, Sustainability
improvement and decarbonization of infrastructure sectors, Net-zero impact, reduction priorities, and
compensation necessity, Carbon sinks and trade-offs between embodied and operational.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Sustainable Infrastructure for Cities and Societies by Michael Neuman, Routledge Taylor &Francis
Group
2. Sustainable Building by Elisabeth Green, Tristram Hope, Alan Yates, ICE, Emerald Publishing Ltd.
3. Sustainable Infrastructure: Principle into Practice by Charles Ainger and Richard Fenner, ICE,
Emerald Publishing Limited
29. Design of Steel Structure (CED 401)
Introduction: Properties of Structural Steel, I. S. Rolled Sections, I. S. Specifications. Design Approach:
Factor of Safety, Permissible and Working Stresses, Elastic Method, Plastic Method, Introduction to
Limit States of Design. Connections: Type of Connections, Riveted, Bolted and Welded Connections,
Strength, Efficiency and Design of Joints, Modes of Failure of a Riveted Joint, Advantages and
Disadvantages of Welded Joints, Design of Fillet and Butt Welds, Design of Eccentric Connections.
Tension Members: Net Sectional Area, Permissible Stress, Design of Axially Loaded Tension Member,
Design of Member Subjected to Axial Tension and Bending. Compression Members: Modes of Failure
of a Column, Buckling Failure- Euler’s Theory, Effective Length, Slenderness Ratio, Design Formula: I.S.
Code Formula, Design of Compression Members, Design of Built-Up Compression Members: Laced
and Battened Columns. Plastic analysis of structure: Basics of plastic analysis, Plastic hinge, Shape
factor, Principles of plastic analysis, Mechanism and methods.
Beams: Design Procedure, Built-Up Sections, Plate Thickness, Web Crippling, Web Buckling,
Connections and Curtailment of Flange Plates.
Recommended Book (s):
1. Limit state design in structural steel: M.R. Shiyekar.
2. Design of steel structure: N. Subramaniam.
3. Limit state design of steel structures: S.K. Duggal.
33
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Opportunity for Undergraduate
Research (OUR)
The Opportunities for Undergraduate Research (OUR) program at Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence
aims to give students hands-on experience in conducting research and doing independent work under
faculty supervision. By participating in the OUR program, students are encouraged to satisfy their
natural inquisitiveness and grow their expertise in research methodology. As a result, students have
earned plaudits in the field of research from their early years in undergraduate studies.
The OUR program has been established to:
• Expand opportunities for an active form of learning by students
• Encourage the interaction of undergraduate students with faculty
• Expand the level of research activity on the campus
• Help identify and train potential candidates for our graduate programs
• Demonstrate that teaching and research are compatible and mutually reinforcing.
Students participating in the OUR program do not earn any credit for their degrees.
They should experience:
• A foundational understanding of how research is conducted in their disciplines
• A greater understanding of the information resources available and how to utilize these resources
• How to formulate research questions, and/or the fundamentals of experimental design
• How to interpret research outcomes.
First-year students (to be admitted in 2023-24) are not eligible for participation. A cumulative Grade
Point Average of 6.5 is required to participate in this program. Fourth-year students’ OUR projects
should be distinct from their Bachelor’s Thesis projects.
Individual research projects by UG students under the personal guidance of a faculty member
is expected. A student can submit only one project. Consumables may be allowed against proper
justification, but only up to a limit of INR 30,000 per project. All OUR project participants should
present their results in an Undergraduate Research Conference to be held at SNIOE in August/Sept
every year.
Some of the recent OUR projects from the department:
• Crop monitoring in the agricultural fields using satellite remote sensing techniques
• Modelling of crop yield using the AquaCrop model and data collected in agricultural fields
• A finite element modelling approach to determine the shape and pattern of recycled interlock
pavement
• Study to understand the thermal performance of a non-air-conditioned hostel room of Shiv Nadar
IoE
• Modelling of effective thermal properties of Phase Change Materials (PCM) – Cement mortar
composites
34 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Student Career
Recognizing the unique characteristics of each student and their diverse career aspirations, we tailor
our assistance to meet individual needs. Whether students aim to enter the professional world, or
pursue advanced studies, or embark on entrepreneurial ventures, our commitment to providing
support remains steadfast.
Our objective is to empower students to effectively leverage their education and experiences to achieve
their career objectives. Regardless of the career path they choose, whether it involves employment
in an organization, further education, or entrepreneurship, our goal is to help students identify their
strengths, aspirations, interests, and potential career opportunities. Through personalized guidance,
we aim to equip students with the necessary tools and insights to enhance their readiness for careers
and foster personal growth.
Industry Placement: We collaborate closely with our industry partners to grasp their project
requirements, needs, and expectations for the campus recruitment process. Subsequently, we align
qualified students with placement opportunities through both on-campus and off-campus hiring,
internships, and projects.
Higher Studies: Students’ ambitions for further studies are acknowledged and appreciated. Students are
assisted by faculty members to enhance their profiles for advanced studies. We facilitate connections
for students with our alumni who are currently pursuing higher education abroad, offering guidance
on application procedures, providing information, and advising on admission requirements.
Entrepreneurship: Atal Incubation Centre (AIC) is actively engaged in cultivating entrepreneurship and
aims to play a pivotal role in nurturing sustainable startups that contribute to increased employment
opportunities and wealth creation. Numerous events and initiatives have been organized to raise
awareness and encourage entrepreneurship and innovation.
35
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Contact Us
For further details and clarifications, please write to one of the following:
DR. GYAN VIKASH DR. GOPAL DAS SINGHAL
Head, Associate Head,
Department of Civil Engineering Department of Civil Engineering
School of Engineering School of Engineering
Email: gyan.vikash@snu.edu.in Email: gopal.singhal@snu.edu.in
Telephone: 0120-7170209 (225) Telephone: 0120-7170209 (209)
DR. SHALINI RANKAVAT MR. SACHDEV SINGH
UG Coordinator, Senior Executive Assistant
Department of Civil Engineering Department of Civil Engineering
School of Engineering School of Engineering
Email: shalini.rankavat@snu.edu.in Email: sachdev.singh@snu.edu.in
Telephone: 0120-7170209 (699) Telephone: 0120-7170209 (209)
36 Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
Department of Civil Engineering Undergraduate Prospectus
Glimpse of the University and
Department Activities
37
Empowering Young Minds for Sustainable Development
CONTACT DETAILS
MR. SACHDEV SINGH
Senior Executive Assistant, Department of Civil
Engineering at sachdev.singh@snu.edu.in
DR. SHALINI RANKAVAT U G advisor
Department of Civil Engineering,
at shalini.rankavat@snu.edu.in
Head, Department of Civil Engineering,
at hod.civil@snu.edu.in
Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence NH 91, Tehsil Dadri,
Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh - 201314, India
Ph: +91-120-7170100, +91-120-2662002