UNDERGRADUATE ACADEMIC YEAR
2024-25
H A N D B O O K
www.snu.edu.in
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
2
APPROVED BY THE OFFICE OF THE DEAN OF ACADEMICS IN JULY 2024
These rules govern all students admitted to an
undergraduate program of Shiv Nadar Institute of
Eminence, Deemed to be University (Shiv Nadar IoE).
These rules can be amended, augmented, clarified,
interpreted, added to, deleted, and changed by the
Academic Council/ competent body. Any such change
shall be intimated to the students by display on the official
noticeboard of the Office of Dean, Academics.
3
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
CHAPTER - 1
Eligibility Criteria for the
Award of a UG Degree
SECTION A: DEGREE REQUIREMENTS
A1. Undergraduate Qualifying Criterion (UQC)
i. Each undergraduate (UG) program is at least 150 credits. However, individual programs/
majors may have higher credit requirements, e.g. all engineer ing majors require at least 160
credits.
[Definition and Explanation: Each Course offered will carry credits calculated based on the number of
contact hours per week for a course that runs the whole semester. The credits will be listed as L: T:P, where
L is the number of Lecture Classes, T is the number of Tutorial Classes, and P is the number of Lab Sessions.
A typical Lab Session is usually between 2 and 3 hours in duration. For example, a course with 3:1:1 credit is
a 5-credit course where the student shall attend 3 lectures, 1 tutorial and 1 lab session every week for the
whole semester.
Once a student successfully completes (that is, obtains the minimum passing grade in) a particular course, s/
he shall have earned as many credits as the course carries.]
ii. A student is required to complete all the degree requirements in three to six academic
years. A typical student takes at least four years to complete the requirements of the degree
programme.
[Definition and Explanation: Full semesters are classified as Monsoon (from July/August to December) and
Spring (from January to May). Summer term (June – July) is not counted as Full semesters.]
iii. All graduating students must have at least one Major Area of Study (or Major).
[Definition and Explanation: The Major is the primary area of study for the student and identifies the student’s
degree. For example, a student with a Major in Computer Science and Engineering will receive the degree
of B.Tech. in Computer Science and Engineering, while a student with a Major in Sociology will receive the
degree of B.A. (Research) in Sociology.]
iv. The University minimum credit requirement to earn a Major is 108 credits. However, a
particular Major can have higher credit requirements. For example, for a BTech degree, a
student has to earn at least 118 credits towards their respective major. Refer to the program
prospectus for applicable credit requirements.
[Definition and Explanation: A Major consists of groupings of courses that students are required to take to
graduate with a degree in a disciplinary or interdisciplinary field of study. They consist of required or core
courses that all students pursuing a Major must take, as well as electives, which allow students to individualize
4
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
their area of interest within the Major. Each department will decide which courses are core and which are
elective courses and the combination in which they must be chosen to meet the requirements of their Major.]
v. At least 18 credits must be earned from CCC courses. Each student must earn at least 1.5
credits each from any six of eight topic areas listed below:
[Definition and Explanation: All undergraduate students at Shiv Nadar IoE must take a core group of common
subjects designated as Core Common Curriculum (CCC) courses. The CCC is designed to provide students
with a broad-based understanding of the world, its physical, biological and social systems, the development
of human civilization and culture, and the historical development and modern formation of global society
with a special emphasis on the history and development of India. The CCC consists of courses in 8 Topic
Areas:
1. Indian History and Society (IHS)(CCC1XY)
2. World History and Society (WHS)(CCC2XY)
3. Culture and Communication (CAS)(CCC3XY)
4. Physical and Living Systems (PLS)(CCC4XY)
5. Cognition and Intelligence (CAI)(CCC5XY)
6. Technology and Society (TAS)(CCC6XY)
7. Environment and Ecology (EAE)(CCC7XY)
8. Reasoning and Analysis (RAA)(CCC8XY)
vi. At least 18 credits must be earned from UWE courses.
[Definition and Explanation: UWE stands for Shiv Nadar IoE Wide Electives. A UWE course for a student
is any non-CCC course outside the student’s Major. These courses may or may not have prerequisites (i.e.,
courses that must be taken before a particular course can be taken). The UWE credits for a student cannot
come from courses that are either (i) from a core course, or a mandatory requirement, of the student’s Major
or (ii) from a course chosen by the student as an elective requirement of the student’s Major.]
vii. Six credits are floating and can be used as defined below:
[Definition and Explanation: The students would be required to earn a minimum of 18 credits each in CCCs
and UWEs and would be free to choose the remaining 6 credits from either CCC courses or UWE courses
or any combination of departmental electives/High-level courses of the department or any other courses on
approval by Office of Dean Academics/Dean of School/Vice Chancellor].
viii. No more than 30 CCC credits will be counted towards the degree.
ix. At least 18 of the total credits must be earned from courses with REAL [Research, Experiential
and Applied Learning] component.
[Definition and Explanation: The Shiv Nadar IoE integrates research, and training in the conduct of research,
into the undergraduate curriculum across all disciplines. To fulfil their degree requirements undergraduates
are required not only to take courses that train them to conduct research but are also required to undertake
or participate in active research projects. All students at the Shiv Nadar IoE are also required to participate
5
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
in experiential learning activities such as internships, volunteer ships or service-learning projects within and
outside of the Shiv Nadar IoE setting. REAL requirements can be fulfilled through several different types of
courses (Major/Electives/CCCs), projects, and work and service opportunities, including research projects;
design projects; practicums; cooperative education; service-learning programs; internships & volunteer
ships; and cultural immersion programs. Each course that has a REAL component will be so marked.]
x. At least 18 of the total credits must be earned from courses with VELS [Value, Ethics,
leadership, and Service] component.
[Definition and Explanation: To further the objective of preparing students for leadership positions in society,
students must take courses that contain material intended to prepare them for a life-long commitment to
leadership grounded in values, ethics and service to society. Students must take at least 18 credits in VELS
courses to fulfil their degree requirements. These VELS-designated courses can be taken as part of Shiv
Nadar IoE Electives, as part of the courses taken to fulfil the requirements of a Major or CCC courses. These
courses can also be combined with courses that fulfil REAL and/or DISE requirements. The Shiv Nadar IoE
Course Catalogue shall identify those courses that fulfil VELS requirements.]
xi. At least 18 of the total credits must be earned from courses with DISE [Design, Innovation,
Skill, Entrepreneurship] component.
[Definition and Explanation: Students must incorporate courses with an innovation focus in their programs
of study and endeavour to take advantage of skill development and entrepreneurship. Students must take at
least 18 credits in DISE courses to fulfil their degree requirements. Innovation, entrepreneurship and skill
development courses can be taken as part of Shiv Nadar IoE Electives, Majors, and CCCs as well as to fulfil
the requirements of DISE courses. These courses can also be combined with courses that fulfil REAL and/or
VELS requirements programs. The Shiv Nadar IoE Course Catalogue shall identify those courses that fulfil
DISE requirements.]
xii. The degree shall be awarded only if the student completes the credit requirements and has
a minimum of 5.0 CGPA.
[Definition and Explanation: The grading scheme and calculations of CGPA are detailed in Chapter 2.]
xiii. SWAYAM and any other approved online platforms.
SWAYAM credits are unavailable for first-year undergraduate students except for CCC courses in the second
semester. The maximum number of SWAYAM/Online credits that can be claimed for the entire duration of
the B. Tech programme is 16 while for other undergraduate programmes is 15. A student is allowed to claim
CCC/UWE/Major Elective credits against the approved list of courses as recommended by the Office of the
Dean of Academics. The rules and regulations as laid in the Academic Policy for SWAYAM, duly approved by
the Office of the Dean of Academics, apply to all SWAYAM and any other approved online platforms.
A2. School Undergraduate Qualifying Criterion (SUQC)
Each school, if it wishes, shall set its own minimal set of criteria for any student to get an undergraduate
degree with a major offered by a department under that school.
These shall be called School Undergraduate Qualifying Criterion (SUQC). Under no circumstances, SUQC
shall be less, either in any part or whole, than the Undergraduate Qualifying Criterion (UQC). These will be
explicitly mentioned in the School’s prospectus.
6
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
A3. Department Undergraduate Qualifying Criterion (DUQC)
Each department shall set its own minimal set of criteria for any student to get an undergraduate degree with
a major offered by that department. These shall be called Department Undergraduate Qualifying Criterion
(DUQC). Under no circumstances, DUQC shall be less, either in any part or whole, than SUQC. These will be
explicitly listed in the relevant School or Department’s prospectus.
SECTION B: REGISTRATIONS
B1. Registration Requirements
Every student must register for every semester that she/he spends at Shiv Nadar IoE. The registration will
include separate individual registration in each of the courses that the student wishes and is allowed to take
that semester. The following conditions apply:
i. An undergraduate student of Shiv Nadar IoE, admitted as a first-year undergraduate, has to
register for a minimum of 6 Full semesters.
[Definition and Explanation: See Chapter 1, Section A1.i that describes the duration of the undergraduate
program. The minimum duration to complete any undergraduate program offered by the Shiv Nadar IoE is
6 Full semesters. However, the actual duration to complete the undergraduate degree shall be contingent
upon the successful completion of credit requirements listed by the respective departments.]
ii. An undergraduate student of Shiv Nadar IoE must complete the degree requirements within
a maximum of 12 Full semesters.
iii. An undergraduate student will be classified as a ‘Full time Student” of a (Full) Semester if s/he
registers for a minimum of 12 credits. For the eighth semester, the minimum credit requirement
is 6 credits.
[Definition and Explanation: Any course offered by the Shiv Nadar IoE that allows a student to earn credits
to satisfy any of the qualifying criteria is called a credit – course.]
iv. No student will ordinarily be allowed to register for more than 25 credits in one semester.
Exceptions may be allowed by written permission of the Dean of Academics (DoA) and on the
recommendation of the Undergraduate Advisor after due vetting of the necessary reasons.
Such exceptions cannot be given for more than two semesters in the entire degree program.
v. All incoming students (i.e., on admission to the UG program) will be registered as Full Time
students (see clause B1.iii).
vi. A student who fails to secure a CGPA of 5.0 at the beginning of any semester shall be placed on
Academic Probation. A student on Academic Probation will be required to get written consent
from the department UG advisor to register for courses and will also be required to periodically
meet a special advisor assigned to him/her by the Dean of Academics (DoA).
[Definition: A student under Academic Probation will not be allowed to register for more than 20 credits, and
course registration will be based on advice from the UG advisor. A student will exit the Academic Probation
once their CGPA crosses 5.0. In the event a student fails to achieve a minimum CGPA of more than 5.0, the
student will continue to be on Academic Probation in the subsequent semester. A student under Academic
Probation will become ineligible for On-campus jobs and any office-bearing post in the student body/clubs/
society.]
7
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
SECTION C: MINIMUM STANDARDS
C1. Continuation of merit-based scholarships/financial aid
i. All financial aid/scholarship, be it full or partial, is given only to a student who has not spent
more than 8 full semesters at Shiv Nadar IoE. In principle, therefore,
(a) A student can be financially assisted for a maximum of 8 full semesters counted continuously from the
first Full Semester that the student registers in, and
(b) A student taking more than 8 full semesters to complete the program will not get any financial assistance
from the ninth full semester onwards.
For each of the courses that the student wishes and is allowed to take that semester, the following conditions
apply:
(i) There is no financial aid for Summer Term.
(ii) If a first-year student is granted admission with financial aid, continuation of the assistance is conditional
on the student maintaining a good academic record. Please refer to the Shiv Nadar IoE Policy for Retention
of Tuition Fee Waivers for Undergraduate Students for further details.
(iii) Financial aid may be withdrawn as a consequence of disciplinary action taken by the Proctoral Committee/
Disciplinary committee.
(iv) Retention of scholarship is subject to minimum CGPA/SGPA as per policy.
[Definition and Explanation: Please refer to the Shiv Nadar IoE Policy for Retention of Tuition Fee Waivers
for Undergraduate Students for further details]
C2. Maintenance of minimum academic standards
i. A student shall be issued a warning letter if his/her CGPA, or SGPA, is less than 5.0. Such a
student shall be required to sign an undertaking as laid down by the Dean of Academics (DoA)
to register for courses.
ii. Students on Academic Probation shall be required to register with the Dean of Academics
(DoA) for a special advising program to be able to register for courses.
iii. If the CGPA of a student falls below 4.00 at any time, from the end of the second semester
onwards, his/her admission from the Shiv Nadar IoE shall be terminated.
[Definition and Explanation: For this rule, ‘semester’ means a semester in which the student is registered as
a full-time student. If any student officially withdraws for a full semester during the first academic year, the
same shall not be counted while applying this rule]
C3. Appeal against termination
A student terminated under the provisions of C2 (iii) can appeal to the Dean Academics /Competent body
for review of such a decision with strong reasons to explain his/her failure to maintain minimum academic
standards. The decision of the Dean Academics/competent body shall be final.
8
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
CHAPTER - 2
Evaluation/Assessment
and Attendance
SECTION A: EVALUATION/ASSESSMENT
A1. The Evaluation/Assessment Scheme for each course shall be announced in class
within one week of the first class held.
A2. Evaluation/Assessment at Shiv Nadar IoE will be done by the instructor of the
course. If the same course is being offered to more than one batch, all efforts will be
undertaken to ensure that the evaluation scheme is uniform across all batches.
A3. To maintain transparency in the grading, students are given an opportunity to
view their graded evaluated component by the faculty.
A4. All students will be allowed to view their answer sheets of the final exam (if
any) on the viewing day, as per the academic calendar. No more opportunity to view
answer sheets shall be available to the students after this date. If a student does not
agree with the grade awarded, s/he will be given a chance to request for re-evaluation
in the end semester examination component. The window for re-evaluation will be
announced by the Controller of Examinations.
SECTION B: ATTENDANCE POLICY
Every student has to register for every semester that she/he spends at Shiv Nadar IoE. The registration will
include separate individual registration in each of the courses that the student wishes and is allowed to take
that semester. The following conditions apply:
B1. Attendance is mandatory for all courses.
B2. All undergraduate students at Shiv Nadar IoE are expected to be present for all of
the scheduled classes. For whatever official or private reasons, a shortfall of no more
than 25% is permitted in each course.
B3. Failure to meet the attendance requirements in a course will lead to an F* grade
in that course.
B4. Admit cards for appearing in the end term exam in all registered courses will be
available for students to download a day before the start of the exam. Any course
in which a student is registered and has not satisfied the minimum attendance
9
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
requirement would not appear in the admit card and hence the student will not be
allowed to take that exam. The student would receive F* grade in courses where
attendance is short.
B5. In the case of the first half CCC, if a student is short on attendance, the student
will be barred from taking the final examination.
B6. Please note that even if the student appears for the final examination, the student
will be awarded F* grade (due to attendance shortfall) via the Grade Submission
System in case no exceptions are made.
10
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
CHAPTER - 3
Grading Scale
SECTION A: GRADING SCALE
Currently, the Shiv Nadar IoE follows a 0 to 10-point grading scale. If, at any time, the empowered bodies of
the Shiv Nadar IoE decide to change the grading scale, an equivalence chart shall be provided. Any student
who feels aggrieved by the change shall have the right to appeal to the Dean of Academics (DoA) for redressal.
A1. Grading Scale: The current grading scale, with explanations are given in the
following table:
Letter grade Grade Point (GP) Description
A 10 -
A- 9 -
B 8 -
B- 7 -
C 6 -
C- 5 -
D 4 Minimum Passing Grade
E 2 Fail
F 0 Fail
F* 0 Fail due to Attendance Shortfall
I - Incomplete
R - Result Withheld
W - Withdrawn from Course
Z - Course Continuation
AP - Audit Pass
AF - Audit Fail
AU - Audit Successfully Completed
S - Satisfactory Completion (Non-credit Courses)
U - Unsatisfactory
P - Pass
NP - Not Pass
TR - Transfer Credits
11
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
SECTION B: DESCRIPTIONS AND NOTES ON THE GRADING SCALE
Every student must register for every semester that she/he spends at Shiv Nadar IoE. The registration will
include separate individual registration in each of the courses that the student wishes and is allowed to take
that semester. The following conditions apply:
B1. Only courses with points attached (i.e., with letter grades A to F) will be used in
the calculation of SGPA and CGPA. Major, UWE and CCC courses, as well as REAL,
VELS and DISE courses, will usually have points attached to them.
[Definition and Explanation: Descriptions of SGPA and CGPA are given in 3. B14 and 3.B15.]
B2. All non-contributory (not counting towards SGPA or CGPA) courses so designated
by the department, will have an S/U grade or P/NP grade. An S grade will be awarded
for satisfactory completion of such a course, while a U grade is for non-satisfactory
performance by the student in that course. The instructor in charge of such a course
will inform the class within the first week of classes what constitutes satisfactory
performance. A “P” grade requires performance at least at C- level, including meeting
the attendance requirements. It will earn full credits towards graduation. A “P” grade
allows the course to be used as a prerequisite for other courses. An “NP” grade earns
no credits and will also be recorded in the transcript. The student should apply to the
Dean of Academics (DoA) for the P/NP grading option by the given deadline, which
will be two weeks after the last day of the “midterm examinations week”. The P/NP
option is available only for Major Elective and UWE courses.
B3. A course instructor can allow a student to audit a course. However, the Dean
of Academics (DoA) is the ultimate authority to permit a student to audit a course.
If a student successfully audits the course, s/he will be given an AP grade; if not,
the student receives an AF grade. The instructor will determine what constitutes
a successful ‘audit’ of a course. An audited course will not be counted towards the
student’s SGPA/CGPA or contribute to the earned credits. The grade (AP or AF) will
appear in the Semester Transcript. All courses that have been successfully audited
(i.e., those with grade AP) by the student will appear as AU in the student’s Final
Transcript.
B4. The student can be given an I grade if s/he is unable to complete, within the semester,
the requirements of a registered course due to extraordinary circumstances (e.g. Shiv
Nadar IoE official duty or proven medical reasons). The student desirous of getting an
I grade must contact the Dean of Academics (DoA) or the Director/Dean of Students
with the necessary documents as early as possible. An I grade in any semester must
be converted to a letter grade (between A and F) within the time limit announced by
12
APPROVED BY THE OFFICE OF THE DEAN OF ACADEMICS IN JULY 2024
the Controller of Examination failing which it would be automatically converted to an
F grade. A course with an ‘I’ grade will not count towards the calculation of the SGPA/
CGPA; however, once the grade is converted to a letter grade between A and F, it will
be counted in the semester where the course was taken.
B5. If for some reason a student finds that s/he cannot doacademic justice to a course
that s/he has registered for, then an application to withdraw the registration for this
course can be made to the Dean of Academics (DoA) through the Undergraduate
Advisor (of the student’s Major). The application must be made before the announced
last date for withdrawal. The application shall be accepted provided the student
remains registered for the minimum number of credits and courses for the semester (as
per the extant rules of that semester). In case the application is approved, the student
shall be awarded the grade W, and the course will not count towards calculations of
the SGPA/CGPA.
B6. D is the minimum passing grade. If a student receives grade D or above in a course,
s/ he has passed the course.
B7. E is a failing grade like F, but the student gets a chance to clear the E grade, latest
by the first week of the next semester or as announced by the Dean of Academics,
with a maximum possible grade D. Only one chance at retest will be given.
An E grade can also be converted to a passing grade by retaking the course in a subsequent semester and
achieving that grade. Note that the later grade will always replace the initial one. For example, an E could
become F.
A failing student earns an E instead of F if both of the following conditions are met:
(a) The total marks are not more than 10% below the passing marks. (Thus, if a course had a passing
requirement of 40%, the E cutoff would be 30%).
(b) The student has met the attendance requirements of the course.
An E grade can be used to satisfy prerequisite requirements. An E grade earns 2 grade points. E is used in
GPA calculations but does not contribute credits towards graduation. An E grade in a Major core course must
be converted to a passing grade before graduation. E grade in an elective course (Major elective or UWE or
CCC) can be converted to a passing grade or replaced by a grade from a subsequent elective course of the
same category. If it is not cleared by graduation,
(a) It will show on the final transcript as an uncleared course.
(b) It will be included in the final CGPA calculation.
(c) Its credits will not count towards graduation. However, it will not bar a student from graduation, provided
the required credits are achieved from other courses.
13
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
B8. Z is the grade awarded for courses that extend into the next semester. Z grade
in a course must be converted to a letter grade from A to F, or ‘I’, by the subsequent
semester. If the Z is converted to an ‘I’, then rule 3.B4 is applicable. Z grade is not used
to calculate the SGPA/CGPA but is counted in the semester when the letter grade
between A to F is awarded.
B9. R is the grade awarded for courses where the result is withheld; it is not counted
for SGPA/CGPA calculations.
B10. Credits: Each Course offered at the Shiv Nadar IoE will carry credits which are
calculated on the basis of the number of contact hours per week for a course that
runs the whole semester. The listing of the credits will be given as L:T:P, where L is the
number of Lecture hours in a week, T is the number of Tutorial hours in a week and
P is the number of Lab Sessions in a week. A typical Lab Session is usually of 2 to 3
hours’ duration. For example, a course with 3:1:1 credit is a 5 credit course where the
student shall attend 3 lecture hours, 1 tutorial hour and 1 lab session every week for
the whole semester.
B11. Earned Credits: Once a student successfully completes a particular course, s/
he shall have earned as many credits as the course carries. (To successfully complete
a course means that the student has to get at least the minimum passing grade D in
that course.)
B12. SGPA or Semester Grade Point Average: Each grade (from A to F) has a grade
point (GP) associated with it (as detailed in the Table appearing in 3.A1). SGPA, broadly
speaking, is the average of the grade points of all the credit - courses that a student has
registered for in the semester. But this average is weighted according to the credits
associated with the respective course. This yields the following formula for the SGPA:
where,
i denotes a course the student has registered in and completed in that semester;
i =1,2,..,n;
Ci is the number of credits associated with course i; and
Gi is the grade point earned in course i.
14
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
B13. CGPA or Cumulative Grade Point Average: In calculating the CGPA, all
completed credit courses taken by the student up to that point are considered. Thus,
where,
j denotes all courses the student has registered in and completed in the Shiv Nadar IoE;
j =1,2,…,m;
Cj is the number of credits associated with course j, and Gj is the grade point earned by the student in course
j.
B14. CGPA to Percentage Conversion
The Shiv Nadar IoE Academic Council/competent body has approved a CGPA to a percentage conversion
factor of 10. The CGPA for any student shall be calculated as follows:
Percentage Score equivalent to the CGPA = (CGPA) * 10
B15. External Credit Earned by Shiv Nadar IoE Students
Students pursuing a degree at Shiv Nadar IoE may also earn credits towards that degree from other
institutions in ways such as the following:
i. Via a dual degree agreement between Shiv Nadar IoE and another institution.
ii. Via an exchange program between Shiv Nadar IoE and another institution.
iii. By visiting another recognized/accredited institution and completing courses there.
Such credit transfer is subject to the following rules:
1. The student must apply to his/her Department at least 4 weeks prior to visiting the other institution. The
Department will respond, within 2 weeks of the submission of the application with the following details:
a. The core courses at Shiv Nadar IoE which may be waived based on the transferred credits.
b. The external credits which may be transferred under the various Elective heads: Major Elective,
University Wide Elective, and Common Core Curriculum.
A student who applies late for credit transfer may have the application rejected.
2. A student may earn credit at another institution only after completing two semesters at Shiv Nadar IoE
and maintaining a CGPA of at least 6.0.
3. Marks or grades equivalent to at least C- (5 points out of 10) are required for a course to be considered for
credit transfer.
4. Except for a dual degree program, credit transfer from other institutions cannot exceed 25% of the total
minimum requirements for the Shiv Nadar IoE degree.
5. Credit may not be granted for the same course twice. A student who has been allowed to transfer credit
for a course may not earn credit for an equivalent course at Shiv Nadar IoE, and conversely.
15
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
6. To qualify for credit transfer, courses should be of an appropriate level. The following are some course
categories that will not be considered for transferring credits.
a. Courses which are a level or more below the courses that the student is taking at Shiv Nadar IoE.
b. Non-academic/Remedial/ Developmental courses.
c. Audited courses.
Grades may be transferred, in addition to credits, only when there is an agreement to that effect between
Shiv Nadar IoE and the other institution. The agreement should include an equivalency chart between the
grading systems of the two institutions.
The student’s transcript will specifically indicate the credits transferred from other institutions, by declaring
‘Transfer’ along with the name of the credit-granting institution in the ‘Status’ column. When credit is
transferred but not the grade, the grade will be entered as TR. In this case, the course will not count towards
the CGPA calculations.
SECTION C: CLEARING, SUBSTITUTION AND IMPROVEMENT
C1. To qualify for an undergraduate degree from Shiv Nadar IoE, the student must
earn a certain number of credits in his/her specialization, or major. In general, there
are two types of required credit courses for a major, those which are mandatory and
those which are electives.
Students majoring in a field must pass the mandatory courses in that field. A minimum number of elective
courses must be chosen from a set of courses earmarked as electives by the faculty of the major discipline.
C2. Clearing an F grade in a Mandatory course: If a student receives an F in a course
that is mandatory for her/his major, s/he has to self-register again for that course at
16
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
the earliest (under the advice of his/her Undergraduate Advisor). If the student gets
a D or a higher grade in the second attempt, then the F grade shall not be shown in
all the subsequent transcripts and the new course shall indicate that this course has
been cleared.
C3. Clearing an F grade in an Optional course: If a student receives an F grade in an
optional course, s/he has the option to register again for that course at the earliest
(under the advice of his/her Undergraduate Advisor). If the student gets a D or a
higher grade in the second attempt, then the F grade shall not be shown in all the
subsequent transcripts and the new course shall indicate that this course has been
cleared.
C4. Substituting an F grade in an Optional course: If a student receives an F grade in
an optional course which s/he does not want to repeat, then s/he has the option to
register for another course of the same category (Major Elective, UWE, CCC) to get
the F grade substituted by the grade earned in the new course.
C5. Improving an earlier grade by repeating the course: If a student wishes to
improve the grade received in a course, s/he can make an application to do so to the
Dean of Academics (DoA).
The application will be considered only under the following conditions:
i. This is the first time the student is seeking a grade improvement in this particular course.
ii. The current grade in the course was obtained in one of the three semesters immediately preceding the
semester in which the application is being made.
If the application is approved/accepted, the following conditions will hold:
iii. If the improvement attempt is for a mandatory course, the grade received in the second attempt will
be substituted in place of the earlier grade in the calculation of CGPA and reported in all subsequent
transcripts. If the grade received is F, the student must repeat the course till s/he gets a passing grade (D
or above).
iv. If the improvement attempt is for an optional (elective for the major or otherwise) course, then the
new grade, whatever it is, will be substituted in place of the earlier grade in the calculation of CGPA and
reported in all subsequent transcripts. No substitution will be allowed for an improved course.
v. During the improvement attempt, the course shall not count towards the minimum number of courses
that need to be registered for in a semester; however, it may be so counted if 3.C5.iv is applicable.
vi. During the improvement attempt, the course shall count towards the maximum number of courses that a
student can register for in a semester.
vii. The Academic Council/competent body can prescribe fees for clearing or improvement. This fee cannot
be waived.
17
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
C6. Improving an earlier grade by substituting the course: If a student wishes to
improve the grade received in a non-mandatory course by substituting it by another
course of the same category, s/he can make an application to do so to the Dean of
Academics through the Undergraduate Advisor of the student’s Major.
The application will be considered only under the following conditions:
i. No course can be substituted more than once throughout the duration of the program.
ii. Any substituted course cannot be re-substituted by another or the same course.
If the application is approved/accepted, the following conditions will hold:
iii. Only the grade received in the substituting course, whatever it is, will be counted in CGPA calculations
and appear in all subsequent transcripts.
iv. No improvement is allowed in the substituting course.
v. The substituting course shall not count towards the minimum number of courses that need to be registered
for in a semester.
vi. The substituting course shall count towards the maximum number of courses that a student can register
for in a semester.
vii. The Academic Council/competent body can prescribe fees for substitution. This fee cannot be waived.
C7. Clearing, improving or substituting: A course will be allowed subject to
availability of space in that course.
C8. Grading and Attendance requirements for Clearing, Improving or Substituting
i. Students repeating a course (clearing, improving, or substituting) shall have to participate in all the graded
components for such course.
ii. The student shall be required to meet the Shiv Nadar IoE attendance requirements, as prescribed in
Chapter 2, Section B2 while repeating a course.
However, the course instructor may consider waiving the attendance requirements, partly or fully, provided
the following hold:
a. There is a timetable clash between the repeated course and the course/s enrolled in the given semester.
b. The student had fulfilled the attendance requirements while pursuing the course previously.
SECTION D: SPECIAL TOPICS, NOTES, EXPLANATIONS, DEFINITIONS
& DESCRIPTIONS
D1. Audited Course/ To Audit a Course: Sometimes, a student may wish to acquire
more knowledge by attending a course but may not wish it to be counted towards his/
her CGPA. S/he can choose to ‘Audit’ such a course. Permission to audit a course is
fully dependent on the Instructor of that course. Conditions/standards to be met for
18
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
auditing a course will be set by the instructor of the course. Only AP (on passing the
course) or AF (on failing the course) letter grades can be obtained in an audited course.
These grades will appear in only the Semester Transcript. Subsequent transcripts,
including the Final Transcript, shall show only those audited courses in which the
student received an AP letter grade, and they will have the letter grade AU against
them.
D2. Letter and Point Grades: After a credit - course, every student who has registered
for that course shall be awarded a letter grade. At present, the grades that can be
awarded are A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E, F, F* W, Z, S, U, I, R, AP, AF & AU. Out of these, only
grades A, A-, B, B-, C, C-, D, E, F & F* shall count towards the calculations of SGPA and
CGPA. These grades shall be awarded in credit – courses. Each Letter Grade has a
point grade associated with it. These are given in the Table in Section A.
D3. Non-contributory Courses: Certain courses may not contribute towards the
student’s CGPA or SGPA earned. Such courses are termed as non-contributory
courses. Examples of such courses are (so designated) Internships and Audited
Courses.
D4. Major: Every undergraduate student of Shiv Nadar IoE will specialize in a
particular stream (like Mechanical Engineering, Economics etc.) which will be offered
by a department; and this will be called the declared Major of the student. The degree
awarded will have the Major mentioned explicitly. For example, B.Tech. Mechanical
Engineering, B.Sc. (Research) Mathematics, B.A. (Research) Economics, etc.
D5. Minor: Every undergraduate student of Shiv Nadar IoE can choose to do a Minor
subject by meeting the selection and credit requirements of the offering department/s.
This means that the student earns certain (as decided by the department offering the
Minor) credits in that subject. The Minor has to be an area of study that is different
from the student’s Major. For example, a student with a declared Major in Computer
Science and Engineering may opt to do a Minor in Physics. In this case, the student
shall receive the degree B.Tech. Computer Science and Engineering with a Minor in
Physics.
The decision of whether the student will be allowed to do the Minor will rest
completely with the department that offers the Minor. Each department shall have
an Undergraduate Advisor, who shall look at the records of the student, the capacity
of the department to admit students to that Minor, the constraints of the schedule
of classes, and any other relevant details and take an appropriate decision. A student
may be required to spend additional time than the minimum program duration, i.e. 6
or 8 full semesters, to earn a minor.
19
UNDERGRADUATE
HANDBOOK
D6. Major Specialization: If a student so chooses, s/he may specialize in a sub-field
relevant to his/her Major. For example, a Mathematics Major may want to specialize
in Mathematical Finance. The relevant department and the school will decide on the
credit requirements for the specialization. The student has to register with the relevant
Department and the Dean of Academics (DoA). The degree awarded shall record
the specialization. For example, B.Sc. (Research) Mathematics with Specialization in
Mathematical Finance.
D7. All credit requirements for a Major, Minor or Major Specialization must be
approved by the Academic Council/competent body.
D8. Change of Rules: The Academic Council/competent body reserves the right to
amend, augment, clarify, interpret, add to, delete from, and change these rules for
the general good of the University. Any change shall be intimated to the students by
display on the official notice board of the Dean of Academics (DoA). Any student who
feels aggrieved by any change shall have the right to appeal to the Dean of Academics
for redressal. The Academic Council/competent body shall take into consideration
the report of the Dean of Academics and decide on the appeal. The decision of the
Academic Council/competent body will be final.
20
Shiv Nadar IoE, Delhi NCR
NH - 91, Tehsil Dadri, District Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh - 201314
Tel.: +91-120-7170100