
2
Table of contents
Shiv Nadar University: our distinctive history 4
Overview of the program 5
Scholarships 5
Recognition 5
Degree options 6
Why choose this program? 7
Distinctive features of the program 8
Choice and flexibility 8
AI and tech fluency: The innovation hub 8
Unparalleled experiential learning 8
International opportunities 8
Multiple career options 8
Program structure and curriculum 9
SUSTAINABILITY STUDIES MAJOR 10
Overview 10
Learning outcomes 11
Career options 11
Partner organizations for experiential learning 12
Curriculum 12
The campus: a unique site for studying sustainability 13
ARCHAEOLOGY HERITAGE, AND HISTORICAL STUDIES MAJOR 14
Overview 14
Learning outcomes 15
Career options 15
Partner organizations for experiential learning 16
Curriculum 17
SOCIETY, CULTURE, TECHNOLOGY MAJOR 18
Overview 18
Learning outcomes 19
Career options 19
Partner organizations for experiential learning 20
Curriculum 21
Program chairs 21
Your campus life at Shiv Nadar University 22
FAQs 22
IHS scholarships, awards and financial aid 23
Admission process and eligibility criteria 23
Interested? What to do next? 24
3
Shiv Nadar University:
Our distinctive history
Shiv Nadar University is India’s premier multidisciplinary research university. Within
just fourteen years, it has defined a new trajectory for higher education in India.
Established in 2011 by Mr. Shiv Nadar - one of Asia’s foremost philanthropists
and a pioneer of India’s technological revolution. The university is part of the
Shiv Nadar Foundation (founded in 1994). The Foundation’s initiatives span the
entire spectrum of education and art, making it one of India’s largest philanthropic
organizations. In 2022, the university was recognized as the youngest Institution
of Eminence by the Government of India, one of only four private institutions in
the country to receive this distinction.
4
Overview of the program
Shiv Nadar University is a trailblazer in multidisciplinary and interdisciplinary learning. It launched India’s
first 4-year multidisciplinary research degree, which has produced outstanding graduates over the past
decade. Building on this success, the university now introduces a new Interdisciplinary B.A. in Humanities
and Social Sciences with three specializations:
• Sustainability Studies
• Archaeology, Heritage, and Historical Studies
• Society, Culture, Technology
All students share a common core curriculum in their first year, engaging with a wide range of disciplines.
From the second year onwards, students choose their area of specialization and pursue advanced
coursework and experiential learning.
Scholarships
At least 10 scholarships per batch will be awarded to eligible students. These scholarships cover 100%
tuition for all four years. In addition, students are eligible for other university-wide scholarships.
Recognition
Recognized as an Institution of Awarded University of the
Eminence year 2024 (Emerging category
1 of the only 4 private universities under 15 years)
in the country to be designated as 10th FICCI Higher Education
an Institution of Eminence by the Excellence Awards 2024
Government of India
Youngest university to be #3 Top private university
ranked among the top 100 of in India | #5 Top private
NIRF, 9 years in a row university for employability
National Institutional Ranking Indian Institutional Ranking
Framework (NIRF) Framework 2024
2025 Research Leaders: Ranked #1 India’s Best Young University
#25 Among Leading Academic (Private) | #1 India’s Best Young
Institutions Multidisciplinary University
Nature Index India 2025 (Private) | #2 India’s Best Young
STEM University (Public and
Ranked #41 in India; among Private) | India’s Best Engineering
top 22% in Asia Colleges - 2023
QS Asia Ranking 2024 Careers360 Ranking
5
Degree
options
B.A. Research
1
in Interdisciplinary
Humanities and
Social Sciences with a
specialization of your
choice
REQUIREMENTS
Complete 160 credits through coursework and
thesis in any of the three areas of specialisation.
B.A. Honours
2
in Interdisciplinary
Humanities and
Social Sciences with a
specialization of your
choice
REQUIREMENTS
Complete 160 credits through coursework only.
B.A. Research
3
(plus a minor)
Your degree can be B.A.
(Research) in Interdisciplinary
Humanities and Social
Sciences with a specialization
of your choice plus a Minor in
any other program offered at
the university.
REQUIREMENTS
Complete 160 credits through coursework
and thesis from the IHS program and earn
minor credits through coursework from other
departments across the university.
66
Why choose
this program?
As a graduate of this program, you will be equipped to thrive in a rapidly changing world. You will
gain the ability to understand major global trends in geopolitics, climate a change, AI and tech,
the economy, and in culture. This program emphasizes experiential learning through live projects,
fieldwork, exchanges, immersions and internships - integrated into your curriculum.
You do not need to decide before leaving high school who you want to become. The program prepares
you with the skill, empathy, and flexibility to pursue careers across sectors - academia, private sector,
the government, international organizations, and start-ups. Students from any high school stream are
eligible to apply.
Moreover, all students in this program will learn how to use AI responsibly and ethically and to your
advantage in incorporating data to understand various contexts better.
You will learn inside and outside the classroom – through live projects, field trips, exchanges,
immersions, internships and much more. These are integrated into the curriculum and you can choose
any of these options at regular intervals. These will give you an outstanding student experience while
cultivating key competencies.
The World Economic Forum Jobs Outlook 2025, the QS Skills Index, and the National Education Policy
all point towards the need to have graduates who can combine an array of attributes. The program is
designed to deliver these attributes and more.
77
Distinctive features of the program
Unparalleled experiential
Choice and flexibility
learning
• Choose your degree: You can get a B.A. We have created an array of specialized
(Research) degree or a B.A. (Honors) degree learning environments to give you a unique
or a degree with an additional minor student experience in your chosen area of
specialization. specialization. These include:
• Choose your Major. • The Archaeology Lab
• Choose your electives. • The AI Center for Excellence
• Choose how you complete the experiential • Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) Labs
components of the program: Go abroad, • The Shiv Nadar IoE Rapid Labs
intern for an organization, do an
independent project. The choices are
enormous.
International opportunities
AI and tech fluency:
We have many partnerships with universities
The innovation hub in the UK, US, Asia and Europe if you wish to
spend a semester abroad. We have the Office
of International Partnerships and Academic
Every student in the program will partake
Affairs to guide you through these semester-
of a mandatory companion module in AI.
long opportunities. The credits from the courses
This is designed to equip you with the
in your host university will be officially accepted
foundational skills and knowledge of AI from
at SNU and incorporated into the program.
a conceptual and practical standpoint, along
There will be regular information sessions on
with an understanding of its ethical and societal
international and national exchange programs.
implications. You will be able to leverage AI
responsibly and effectively in your chosen
career, and engage in interdisciplinary problem-
solving and collaborative innovation. Most
importantly, it is designed to empower you to Multiple career options
navigate the onslaught of changes that AI is
bringing across industries.
Each of the Majors prepare you for a variety
of career paths. You can move on to higher
In Year 1, you will learn the foundational
education or pursue professional degrees in
aspects of AI, in Year 2 you will learn about AI
journalism, law, heritage management, and
in different contexts through use cases. All this
policy think tanks. Many more opportunities
will build up to Year 3 where you will participate
await you in the field of art, design, visual
in an Innovation Hub. You will work in groups to
studies, marketing, sustainability and
create AI applications and projects that allow for
development sectors.
innovation.
88
Program structure and
curriculum (total 160 credits)
Mandatory core 68 Major University-Wide Experiential AI module
credits 60 credits Electives* 16 Component integrated into the
credits 16 credits program
A set of 17 Students will choose Any 4 courses from • Industry AI literacy
mandatory core any 1 major from any department in Immersion companion module
courses which cover the three below: the university • Campus as a
foundations in the Living Lab
Sustainability • Global
• Natural Studies Exchange
Sciences • Summer
• Social Sciences Archaeology, Internships
• AI Heritage, and
• Ethics Historical Studies Students can
• Environment choose any
• Fundamentals Society, Culture, combination of the
of Business Technology above adding up to
• Writing and 16 credits
Communication Course work +
• Quantitative • Practicum
Skills • Thesis
• Digital
Humanities
*Courses offered by departments and schools across the university are called University-Wide Electives (UWE).
99
M A J O R I N
SUSTAINABILITY
STUDIES
Overview
The Sustainability Studies Major aims to produce sustainability professionals
of international calibre. Our mission is not just to equip students with skills but
also ensure that they enter sectors that bring them professional satisfaction.
They will be prepared to tackle pressing global challenges like climate change,
resource depletion, and environmental degradation, making their skills highly
valued. They can find work in diverse roles, including environmental consultants,
policy makers, researchers, and sustainability managers. Due to the opportunities
to make positive impacts on the environment and society, graduates employed
in these sectors, find their work highly satisfying.
10
Learning outcomes
In this Major, you will develop:
1. A problem-solving mindset: Cultivating a mind-set focused on addressing complex problems,
fostering innovation and creativity in finding sustainable solutions. The curriculum combines lectures,
lab experiments, and exposure to policy professionals and case studies that show the success of
sustainable solutions.
2. A global perspective with local sensitivity: The program emphasizes the importance of understanding
global challenges without losing sight of local needs. For example, you will meet with pollution control
board officials and learn about the management of sustainable cities; you will interact with farmers
to learn about ecological changes that impact agricultural yields and how policies are enacted on the
ground.
3. Ethical leadership: Ethical and responsible practices will give you a competitive advantage in future
employment. This will be achieved through:
• Internships and exchange programs with reputed institutions (see below).
• All courses focus on solutions, technological interventions, and real world experiences to enrich
students’ abilities to be sensitive to different positions of actors and the varied human and
environmental impacts of policies and technologies.
Career options
• Higher studies, research, and academia
• Environmental policy and action
• Environmental reporting and consulting with national and international organizations
• Roles in policy analysis and research with government, private sector, chambers of
commerce, think tanks, etc.
• Journalism with a focus on issues related to sustainability and development
• Roles in the corporate sector such as Sustainability Officers, Sustainability Managers,
Corporate Social Responsibility officials
• Roles in various institutions in the public sector
11
Partner organizations for experiential learning
At SNU, we have instituted partnerships with several local and international organizations working in the
fields of environment, sustainability and conservation. As part of the course programme, students will be
provided the opportunity to pursue internships. Some of our partners include:
• Clinton Foundation • BAIF Development Research • Access Development
• Council for Energy Environment Foundation Services
and Water (CEEW) • Keystone Foundation • Urmul Trust
• The Habitats Trust • The Nature Conservancy • Nandi Water
• S M Sehgal Foundation • HCL Foundation and many more.
Curriculum
Interdisciplinary B.A. in Humanities and Social Sciences with Sustainability
Core courses (68 credits) Major in Sustainability (60 credits) Other courses (32 credits)
Sustainability: Concepts and
Reading, Thinking, Writing Mandatory AI Module
Measurements
Introduction to Philosophy Measuring and Reporting Sustainability Campus as a living lab project
Global Exchange (preferred but not
Thinking Historically Biodiversity
mandatory)
The Natural World Conservation Internship or independent project
AI, Technology and Ethics Ecosystems and pollution: Air, water, soil University-Wide Electives
Sociological Imagination Inequality and Sustainability
Sustainable Production 1: Land, Labour,
Quantitative Thinking
Livelihoods
Sustainable Production 2: Sustainable
Qualitative Thinking
Materials and Manufacturing
Sustainability in rapidly urbanizing
Fundamentals of Economics
societies
Geopolitics Sustainable water and energy solutions
Fundamentals of Business Sustainability and disaster management
Interpreting India - 1 Sustainability in action
Interpreting India - 2 Practicum related to Sustainability
Introduction to Digital
Major Thesis*
Humanities
Environment and
Sustainability
The Many Lives of Cognition
Fundamentals of Media and
Communication
*In lieu of a thesis, students can opt for 3 UWEs from the basket of 6 courses provided in year four of the program. UWEs
(University-Wide Electives) are courses offered by departments and schools across the university.
12
The campus: a unique site for studying sustainability
The rich biodiversity of the campus was featured in the iconic Scientific
American magazine.
Shiv Nadar University
students were recognized
as UN Millennium Fellows
based on their campus
projects. Recently they
won the Mercedes-Benz
Fellowship for their project to
make our campus zero-waste
13
M A J O R I N
ARCHAEOLOGY,
HERITAGE, AND
HISTORICAL STUDIES
Overview
This Major in Archaeology, Heritage, and Historical Studies is poised to be a unique
undergraduate program in the country. We are also one of the few universities
that hosts an Archaeology lab for undergraduate and doctoral students.
There is no escaping the past, but how do we understand it? What is heritage?
Who gets to choose and decide what becomes heritage? How does archaeology
investigate climate change in the past? Does Archaeology and History only serve
a public good? These key questions, among others, will be addressed through a
learning-by-doing approach. In this Major, students will explore various themes
through hands-on training with the latest archaeological field and laboratory
14
methods, protocols of collections management, understanding of archival work, and independent research
projects. Through on-site lectures, you will engage with material and collections-based research and
develop critical and reflexive approaches. These will enable a foundational and critical understanding
about material and non-material pasts. Drawing on the latest methods, you will also be introduced to
specialized subfields such as urban, environment, economic, and social histories of South Asia and beyond,
across regions and periods.
With the coming together of Archaeology and History, students will be immersed in classroom learning,
archival research, and field training. You will be equipped to raise analytical questions, undertake rigorous
research projects, tell stories through diverse media, and intervene in policy dialogues. You can flourish
in careers in public policy, archaeology, historical research, museum studies, archiving, cultural heritage,
policy, journalism, academia, media, diplomacy, tourism development, and administration.
Learning outcomes
In this Major, you will
• Learn how archaeologists and historians investigate the past and how cultural heritage is defined.
Receive hands-on training in the latest field and laboratory-based methods, protocols of curatorial
practices and heritage management.
• Understand how museums and curatorial practices are self-reflexive and creative endeavours.
• Learn what makes things, people and places worthy of ‘heritagization’.
• Acquire necessary skills to work in various archives and use diverse primary material.
• Engage with how scholarly and popular histories are produced through archival and documentation
practices.
Career options
• Higher education and academia
• Journalism and Media
• Policy organizations, especially in the field of development, environment, urban
planning, tourism, heritage conservation and management
• Government organizations related to Archaeology and Historical research
• Law, especially related to heritage, antiquities, and conservation practices
• Administrative Services
• Diplomacy
• Heritage Conservation and Management
• Public History and Archival Documentation
• Archaeology and related fields
15
Partner organizations for experiential learning
At SNU, we have instituted partnerships with several local and international organizations working in the
fields of Archaeology, Heritage, and Historical Studies. As part of the course programme, students will
be provided the opportunity to pursue internships. Some of our partners include:
• INTACH Delhi chapter • NewsClick Media
• Directorate of State Archives (West Bengal) • Indian Red Cross Society
• Kiran Nadar Museum of Art • Deccan Heritage Foundation for India (Pune)
• The Habitats Trust • Archaeological field projects
• Hamari Pahchan (NGO in Delhi) and many more.
16
Curriculum
Interdisciplinary B.A. in Humanities and Social Sciences with Archaeology,
Heritage, and Historical Studies Major
Core courses (68 credits) Major Courses (60 credits) Other courses (32 credits)
Reading, Thinking, Writing Introduction to Archaeology Mandatory AI Module
Introduction to Philosophy Cities, Kings, and Temple
Global Exchange (preferred but not
Thinking Historically Mapping Heritage
mandatory)
The Natural World Land, Law and Conquest Internship or independent project
AI, Technology, and Ethics A Modern History of South Asia University-Wide Electives
Sociological Imagination Field Methods in Archaeology
Quantitative Thinking Frauds and Fictions in Archaeology
The Past and Present of Modern
Qualitative Thinking
South Asian Cities
Visual History and the
Fundamentals of Economics
Archaeological Scholarship
Space Archaeology, Remote
Geopolitics
Sensing, and GIS
A Global History of Business &
Fundamentals of Business
Finance
Key Debates in Environmental
Interpreting India - 1
History
Practicum related to Archaeology,
Interpreting India - 2
Heritage and Historical Studies
Introduction to Digital
Major Thesis*
Humanities
Environment and Sustainability
The Many Lives of Cognition
Fundamentals of Media and
Communication
*In lieu of a thesis, students can opt for 3 UWEs from the basket of 6 courses provided in year four of the program. UWEs
(University-Wide Electives) are courses offered by departments and schools across the university.
17
M A J O R I N
SOCIETY, CULTURE,
TECHNOLOGY
Overview
The Major in Society, Culture, Technology offers a unique curriculum, so far
unmatched in the country, that is designed to offer a critical understanding of the
most powerful force shaping society today – ‘technology’. This Major will equip
students to arrive at a well-rounded understanding of the ways in which cultures
and social life are impacted by scientific and technological innovations as much as
how social forces impact these developments.
It offers interdisciplinary insights into understanding the most significant technologies
in our everyday environment, for example, data, information, AI and their impact
on our individual and collective lives. This Major will help students ask some of the
18
most pertinent questions of our times like, how has the history of science shaped the world we live in
today and do technologies exacerbate social problems or help us address them?
The Major also entails an immersive understanding of science, technology, and society with a carefully
curated set of courses that explore real-world social contexts. Understanding how science and technology
both emerge from and operate within particular social contexts is crucial to analyze the challenges, impact,
and potential of technological developments. The overall intention of the major is to train and inform
students about how cultures, customs, and social life are impacted and shaped by scientific developments
and technological innovation, as much as how social forces impact these developments and innovations.
Learning outcomes
By the end of this major, students will be able to:
• Critically analyze the impact of technology on individual human lives, contemporary social
relationships, and social institutions such as the family, religion, politics, and the economy.
• Evaluate how technological advancements are reshaping concepts of community, identity, and
cultural norms in an interconnected global society.
• Reflect thoughtfully, using evidence, on how technology both constrains and empowers individuals
and societies.
• Formulate critical questions about technology’s role in both reducing and exacerbating social
problems.
• Communicate complex ideas about the intersections of social structures and institutions, cultural
norms, and technology clearly and persuasively in both written and oral forms.
Career options
• Policy analysis, specifically tech policies and its intersections with various social
organizations
• Think tanks and civil society organizations, especially those that work at the interface
between tech policy and social sectors
• Journalism, digital media and communications
• Administrative services and policy oriented organizations on governance related issues
addressing pressing concerns such as water, health, urban infrastructure etc. market
research, public relations, and marketing.
• Research and analysis, especially in the fields of science and technology, education and
technology and advocacy
• Academia and higher education in fields like Science and Technology Studies, Sociology,
Anthropology, Public Policy, Law, Media and Culture Studies
19
Partner organizations for experiential learning
At SNU, we have instituted partnerships with several local and international organizations working in the
fields of Society, Culture and Technology. As part of the course programme, students will be provided
with opportunity to pursue internships. Some of our partners include:
• The Kala Chaupal Trust • SEWA
• INTACH (Indian National Trust for Art, • Eklavya Foundation
Culture and Heritage) • Teach for India
• Eka Archiving Services Pvt. Ltd. • Collective Newsroom
• Kiran Nadar Museum of Arts • RRAN
• Outlook India and many more.
20
Curriculum
Interdisciplinary B.A. in Humanities and Social Sciences with Society, Culture,
Technology Major
Major in Society, Culture,
Core courses (68 credits) Other courses (32 credits)
Technology (60 credits)
Reading, Thinking, Writing Society and Culture Mandatory AI Module
Introduction to Philosophy Science, Technology, Society Campus as a living lab project
Economies, Networks and Global Exchange (preferred but not
Thinking Historically
Technologies mandatory)
The Natural World Technologies of Governance Internship or independent project
AI, Technology and Ethics Media, Religion, and Spirituality University-Wide Electives
Sociological Imagination Relatedness and Technology
Self, Expression and
Quantitative Thinking
Interconnectedness
City Technologies and Urban
Qualitative Thinking
Infrastructures
Fundamentals of Economics Technology and Sonic Cultures
Geopolitics Medicine and Biotechnologies
Fundamentals of Business Images and the Visual World
Interpreting India - 1 AI, Data and Information Society
Practicum related to Society,
Interpreting India - 2
Culture, Technology
Introduction to Digital
Major Thesis*
Humanities
Environment and Sustainability
The Many Lives of Cognition
Fundamentals of Media and
Communication
*In lieu of a thesis, students can opt for 3 UWEs from the basket of 6 courses provided in year four of the program. UWEs
(University-Wide Electives) are courses offered by departments and schools across the university.
Program chairs
All academic and administrative matters related to the IHS program will be managed by the following
faculty members.
Dr. Vasundhara Bhojvaid, Department of Sociology I vasundhara.bhojvaid@snu.edu.in
Dr. Divya Kannan, Department of History and Archaeology I divya.kannan@snu.edu.in
Ms. Paulami Ghosh, Senior Manager, Academic Engagements, SHSS | paulami.ghosh@snu.edu.in
To learn more about the program co-chairs and faculty involved in the program, visit the program website
at https://snu.edu.in/programs/interdisciplinary-humanities-and-social-sciences/
21
Your campus life at Shiv Nadar University
The library stands at the heart of our university’s academic ecosystem, serving as a vital hub for both
students and faculty. We subscribe to a diverse range of periodicals and host an extensive collection of
books across multiple disciplines, including select personal collections donated by renowned authors. The
space is further equipped with advanced computing laboratories and study rooms that support research
and analysis.
The university is equipped with world-class sports facilities. Our students continue to win many accolades
in various tournaments year-on-year. The campus houses an Indoor Sports Complex (ISC) with state-
of-the-art sports infrastructure. There are also a host of technical and cultural clubs that range from
astronomy to mythology, dance to debating, and adventure to horse-riding.
SNU strives to ensure the physical safety, mental and emotional wellbeing of students and staff on
campus. Students have access to 24x7 Healthcare Centre and can avail consultation with the counsellors,
physiotherapists, and doctors-on-duty. Specialist doctors are also available on certain days of the week.
Regular health camps and fitness training programs are conducted.
SNU maintains a strict anti-ragging policy and ensures the highest standards of safety and wellbeing of
the students, staff, and faculty. The university has an active anti-ragging committee to address any of
your concerns.
The campus is green and sustainable. Students are not allowed to keep their own motorised vehicles.
Instead, cycling and walking are encouraged. We also have EV shuttles running frequently across the
entire campus.
FAQs
• Is this a Four-Year degree program? • Are there any internships as part of this program?
Yes, this is a four-year degree program in Interdisciplinary Yes, this interdisciplinary program integrates
B.A. in Humanities and Social Sciences. In the final year, a internships into its overall framework which will
student can opt for a thesis in their chosen specialization provide academic credits. SNU also collaborates
or complete the remaining credits through coursework. with important organizations towards this initiative.
However, only students with a minimum of 6 CGPA are During the course of study, a student is expected to
eligible to pursue a thesis. complete up to 12 credits through internships/research
• How do students decide their Majors? assistantships/campus jobs/independent study during
All students in their first year pursue common core courses two consecutive summers.
that extend across disciplines such as the social sciences and • Can I avail study abroad opportunities?
humanities, natural sciences, A.I. and business management. At SNU, we encourage students to receive larger
At the end of the first year, students shall declare their exposure to educational opportunities and cultural
major and will be enrolled into specific courses in year two settings. The University shares several MoUs with
and three, along with an option to choose University-Wide major international and Indian universities. Every
Electives. Second/ Third year degree student, with a minimum
• Can I also receive a Minor in any chosen specialization/ CGPA as mandated by university policy, is eligible to
discipline in the University? apply for a one-semester study abroad/elsewhere in
Yes, a student completing the required set of courses India program.
pertaining to a particular discipline/department during the • What are my job opportunities after completing
course of their program is eligible to receive a Minor degree. this program?
• Does this program offer any fee-concessions/ Plenty! This interdisciplinary program aims to equip
scholarships? students with foundational and critical skills alongside
At least 10 scholarships per batch will be awarded to eligible practical, hands-on training in certain areas of
students. The scholarships cover 100% tuition waiver for specialization. The career options open to you are
all four years! In addition students are eligible for other listed in the respective Majors detailed above.
university-wide scholarships.
2222
IHS Scholarships, Awards and Financial aid
IHS Scholarships
The university is proud to announce
100% tuition fee waiver to 10 students
admitted to the IHS program for their entire journey of four years*
*No separate application is necessary. All applicants to the program are automatically considered for IHS scholarships.
IHS Academic awards University-wide Scholarships & Financial Aid
• Best Thesis Award: Awarded for In addition to the above, all IHS applicants are eligible to apply for the
the best final year thesis. One university-wide scholarships:
for each Major. • School Topper’s Scholarships
• Best Project for Responsible • Scholarships based on class 12th marks & JEE Main score
AI Use: Awarded for innovative • Scholarships for JEE Main Toppers
• Scholarships for top UCEED performers
projects demonstrating ethical
• Need-Based Scholarships
and responsible use of artificial
• Financial Aid
intelligence. Three awards per
• Sports Scholarships
batch.
• Women in B.Tech. Scholarships
• Best Experiential Project Award:
• Vice Chancellor’s Scholarships
Awarded for an experiential
• Armed Forces Dependents Scholarships
learning activity in any of the Note: The University awards these scholarships in accordance with established policies. The
courses of the program. Three decision to change or retain the types of scholarships, award the scholarships, financial aids
and academic awards rest solely with the university and is not subject to challenge or appeal.
awards per batch.
A minimum GPA must be maintained for all scholarships at Shiv Nadar University, Delhi NCR.
Please write to scholarship@snu.edu.in if you have questions.
Admissions process and eligibility criteria
Admission is based on the performance in any of the entrance tests mentioned below:
• Shiv Nadar University Scholastic Aptitude Test (SNUSAT) • College Board SAT
• ACT • CUET
About the Shiv Nadar University Scholastic Aptitude Test & Academic Proficiency
Test (SNUSAT)
SNUSAT is an entrance test for admission to all undergraduate programs at Shiv Nadar University Delhi NCR
campus. It is an online, proctored test which you can take from your home. It will be conducted across 6 cycles
from January 2026 to July 2026.
A set of sample questions will be uploaded to your application dashboard once you select the SNUSAT route and
complete your application payment.
The SNUSAT measures quantitative reasoning and logical reasoning. It is structured as follows:
Sections Number of Questions Duration
Quantitative Reasoning 20 45 minutes
Logical Reasoning 20 45 minutes
For more detail about the admissions process, you are advised to visit www.snuadmissions.com.
Eligibility criteria
For IB, Cambridge and other boards, criteria are as follows:
• Eligibility for IB students: Aggregate of 28 grade points out of 45 or >=65%
• Eligibility for Cambridge Board students: Minimum of 2 subjects at ‘A’ level and aggregate of >=65
Percentage Uniform Mark (PUM)
• Eligibility for other boards: Aggregate of all academic subjects in the marksheet must be >=65%
(must include English) 23
Interested? What to do next?
Any queries related to the program,
Please contact:
Ms. Paulami Ghosh
Email: paulami.ghosh@snu.edu.in
For queries related to admissions,
Please contact:
Ms. Anju Hariharan
Email: shss.admissions@snu.edu.in
Mob: 7428777091
Landline: 0120-7170100,177
Toll free: 18001021768
To apply visit www.snuadmissions.com or scan the QR code
SHIV NADAR UNIVERSITY
NH91, Tehsil Dadri, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh 201314
www.snu.edu.in