DEPARTMENT OF
INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS AND
GOVERNANCE
STUDIES
ANALYTICAL THINKING, PHYSICAL AND
Why Shiv Nadar CREATIVITY, PROBLEM-SOLVING: EMOTIONAL WELL-BEING
With research programs, internships, A vibrant campus life on our
University? entrepreneurial opportunities, and more, 286-acre green campus is
our curriculum teaches key skills. designed just for that.
Shiv Nadar University is a multidisciplinary research university
established in 2011 by Mr. Shiv Nadar, one of Asia’s foremost
JOBS, HIGHER STUDIES
philanthropists and a pioneer of the technological revolution in
OR START-UPS:
ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE:
India. The four Schools at the University offer undergraduate,
Our faculty come from We prepare our students
postgraduate, and doctoral degrees in Engineering, Natural
top institutions in India for a variety of aspirations
Sciences, Humanities and Social Sciences, and Management &
and the world.
Entrepreneurship. It is the youngest university to be recognised
as an Institution of Eminence by the Government of India, a
distinct category of higher education institutions that “strive to
become the top hundred Institutions in the world over time”. In
Why
the Government’s National Institutional Ranking Framework
Shiv Nadar
(NIRF), the University has been the youngest institution in the
'top 100' Overall list for the last five years. University?
Why Study International Relations at
at Shiv Nadar University?
The Department of International Relations and Governance Studies has dedicated faculty members who are
deeply invested in teaching and research and who are keen to offer well-rounded training and exposure to
students interested in studying international relations. We have a unique niche in terms of our ability to combine
global history with cutting-edge theoretical knowledge applied to various practical global challenges.
The Department is attentive to the context of Asia in the 21st century, which entails not replicating any single
dominant worldview but being open to a plurality of perspectives. The Department does not simply train
students to receive existing knowledge but actively encourages them to take their first steps towards research-
ing and developing an initial appreciation of how one contributes to knowledge creation.
We are confident of the training we give to our students. Some of our students who have completed their
undergraduate education with us have secured admission to prestigious universities abroad for further studies.
Finally, our canvas for studying international relations is genuinely expansive: from focusing on international
organisations to the possibility of learning a foreign language (Mandarin) and then specializing in China, we offer
an exciting spread of possibilities.
Curriculum
skills are imparted through the assignments and that familiarise students with other disciplines become
B.A. (Research) in International
evaluation exercises within our courses and available from the 3rd semester onwards. Those who
Relations
through research projects such as the pursue a Minor with a different department usually do
Opportunities for Undergraduate Research (OUR) the required courses in the 5th and 6th semesters.
The B.A. (Research) in International Relations is designed to and the undergraduate thesis project, which Semesters 7 and 8 are assigned for writing the
achieve the following three objectives: commences in the fourth year. undergraduate thesis, internships, and preparation for
1. Provide students with domain knowledge in the discipline 3. Provide students with exposure to external post-BA pathways with the active assistance of the
of International Relations (IR). The program has courses expertise and opportunities to network and build university’s Career Development Centre.
covering the discipline's core areas, which include connections. We do this through our seminars,
international theory, global history, foreign policy, workshops, and conferences in which we invite
international security, international political economy, experts from academia and the policy domains to
international organizations, global governance, speak on contemporary and critical issues. Students
development, and international law. get to meet these experts and learn from their
research and experience, drawing ideas about their
2. Provide students with the core skills of organization of
research and future pathways.
thought (thinking), critical examination of issues in
international relations (analysis), effective oral The program begins with a focus on courses that train
communication of ideas (speaking), and effective written students in International Relations. These courses take
communication of ideas (writing) in various formats. These up most of the first 4 to 5 semesters. Elective courses
is subject to such performance as is considered
Minor
satisfactory according to the metrics laid down by the
university and the department.
We offer a Minor in International Relations to students
from other departments of the university. Students do
a set of 6 courses to be awarded the Minor.
Ph.D. Program
Our Ph.D. program trains prospective doctoral
candidates in research methodology, theory, and
other courses relevant to their doctoral thesis.
Coursework is completed in the first two semesters.
Thesis supervisors are assigned at the beginning of
the second semester. Progression is monitored and
Department of IRGS Faculty
Our faculty is highly regarded, with public policy issues. They also feature They have also secured funding for
Ph.Ds. from distinguished universities in leading national and international conducting research from the South
and institutions such as Harvard media, such as Al Jazeera, as experts Asia Partnership Development Fund,
University; Pontifical Catholic University on international affairs and write University of Exeter; International
of Rio de Janeiro (PUC-Rio, Brazil); columns for newspapers such as The Development Research Centre (IDRC),
School of Oriental and African Studies, Hindu, The Indian Express, and The Canada; Indian Council for Social
University of London; Jawaharlal Nehru Hindustan Times. Science Research (ICSSR), India;
University; and the Centre for Department of Science and
Development Studies (CDS), Our faculty members have held Technology (DST), India; Engineering
Thiruvananthapuram. Besides being fellowships and appointments at and Physical Sciences Research
excellent teachers, they are also leading Harvard University, USA; Renmin Council (ESPRC), UK; Ford Foundation;
researchers in their field. They University, China; Yunnan University, and Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung India,
consistently publish books, book China; the Dalai Lama Institute of among others. They also consult and
chapters, and research articles with Higher Education, India; National serve advisory roles with various
leading publishers worldwide. In recent Maritime Foundation, New Delhi; governmental and non-governmental
years, they have published with Oxford Naval War College, Goa; Institute of institutions.
University Press, Springer, Pearson Chinese Studies, New Delhi; Social
Longman, Orient Blackswan, and other Science Centre (WZB), Berlin;
publishers. They also consult with major Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
governmental and non-governmental Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany and
organizations and author reports on Sciences Po, Paris.
Academic Collaborations
Faculty at the department draws on a whole range of academic networks. In terms of our teaching, we have invited guest
faculty from leading universities worldwide.
As illustrative of this, in a course on international law and world politics, scholars from Cornell University (USA), King's
College, London (UK), Cambridge University (UK), San Diego State University (USA), and Pontificia Universidad Católica
de Valparaíso (Chile) spoke online to International Relations Major students. Regarding our research, colleagues have also
presented their work at the National University of Singapore, the Berlin Social Science Center, the University of
Melbourne, and other academic settings. At the national level, we have signed MoUs with the National Maritime
Foundation and the Institute of Chinese Studies in the recent past. Students actively draw on these intellectual networks
when we eventually write letters of recommendation to them to leading universities around the world.
Our B.A. program students can also study a semester at an overseas university and then transfer the earned credits to
their degree at Shiv Nadar University. This is facilitated through collaborations between Shiv Nadar University's
International Office and universities abroad. In Monsoon 2023, two students of the department selected under New
Southbound Policy Short-term Program studied at National Quemoy University, Taiwan, taking courses in international
relations and Mandarin extensively. However, it is essential to note that mere admission to the B.A. program in
International Relations does not guarantee an opportunity to study a semester abroad. Prospective students and
caregivers must take note of factors such as availability of opportunity, a competitive process, and the cost of studying
abroad in this regard.
OUR Program
Most of our courses have a research or are working on OUR projects within
component. In addition, students can the department as well as with other
partake of the Opportunities for departments of the university. Some of
Undergraduate Research (OUR) program at the OUR topics include domestic politics
the university. in China, nationalism and military
practices in the Second World War,
This program aims to give students India's China policy, and the Pasmanda
hands-on experience in conducting research movement.
and independent work under faculty
supervision. The OUR project runs for a In the final year of the program, students
year, is non-credited, and is provided ample do the undergraduate thesis. This is a
funding by the university. An OUR project credited exercise in which students work
may be carried out by a student in any with the department's faculty members
discipline, not necessarily their Major. Every on a research project, producing at the
year, awards are given to the top three OUR end of the process an 8,000-word paper
projects in the university. Students of the that has the potential to be published in
Department of International Relations and academic journals.
Governance Studies have either completed
Pathway to Progress
There is a wide range of opportunities available to any student trained as a Major in
International Relations, which the department offers. These include master’s and
higher studies within the discipline overseas or at home, journalism with a focus on
world affairs, working with non-governmental organizations in areas such as security,
foreign policy, governance, developments, and potential aspirants to diplomatic
careers training to compete in the Union Public Services Examination or in some
instances, even working with private firms. The department works closely with the
Career Development Centre of the university to assist students with career pathways.
Student Outcomes
Some of our individual alum, on completion of their
undergraduate education with us, are studying master’s at
the University of California, San Diego, the London School
of Economics, and at Claremont Graduate University. One
of our individual alums has also been placed in Bain and
Company, a global management consulting firm. Multiple
students from the batch that graduated in 2023 have
gone on to pursue higher education in leading western
universities while some have joined research and
advocacy organisations within India.
Admissions Eligibility
Bachelor of Arts (Research)
Program Selection Criteria Class 12th Eligibility
SNUSAT Score
International Aggregate of best 4 academic
CUET 2024 Score + Interview
Relations subjects in the marksheet must
be >=65% (must include English)
Valid SAT (College Board) Score
Valid ACT Score
Financial Support
Funding for Tuition and Stipends are available for deserving students applying for B.A
(Research) International Relations.
Contact Details
Dr. Priyanka Pandit Mailing Address
Undergraduate Advisor Department of International Relations and
Department of International Relations & Governance Studies,
Governance Studies P.O. Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence
Email: priyanka.pandit@snu.edu.in Greater Noida Scan Here For More Details:
Pin: 201314
Shiv Nadar University, Delhi NCR
NH 91, Tehsil Dadri, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh - 201314, India
Ph: +91-120-7170100, +91-120-2662002