DEPARTMENT OF
CHEMISTRY
SCHOOL OF NATURAL SCIENCES
UNDERGRADUATE
PROSPECTUS 2023
1
ABOUT THE
THE
DEPARTMENT UNDERGRADUATE
CHEMISTRY
EXPERIENCE
Chemistry education at Shiv Nadar IoE provides a link between the
fundamental principles governing the nature of the universe and
the science of life, and spans traditional as well as a variety of inter-
The chemistry curriculum at Shiv Nadar IoE provides
disciplinary areas. Chemistry, often referred as the central science,
both a broad background in chemical principles as well
as it plays a vital role in nearly every other scientific field. At the
as in-depth study of chemistry or chemistry-related
undergraduate level, we offer B.Sc. (Research) in Chemistry. One
areas that build on this background. The chemistry
can also combine a Minor in Chemistry with a Major in any other
curriculum is divided into three categories: introductory
discipline at Shiv Nadar IoE and vice versa. University-wide elective
general chemistry, foundation courses providing breadth
courses in the curriculum allow students unprecedented freedom
across sub-disciplines, and rigorous in-depth courses
to explore subjects outside their chosen major; in some depth.
that build upon these foundations and develop critical
This flexible and broad curriculum prepares students not just for a
thinking and problem-solving skills. Since chemistry is an
career in chemistry upon graduation, but for a leadership role in the
experimental science, substantial laboratory work is an
world as well.
integral part of almost all our courses. The introductory
general chemistry course provides a common
grounding in basic chemical concepts for students with
diverse backgrounds, develops basic mathematical
and laboratory skills, and prepares students for the
foundation courses. Foundation courses in general
chemistry, analytical chemistry, biochemistry, inorganic
chemistry, organic chemistry, and physical chemistry
provide breadth and lay the groundwork for more in-
depth course work.
2
3
LABORATORY POST-GRADUATE
EXPERIENCE PROGRAMS
The chemistry laboratory regarding hazardous available. Students are trained At the postgraduate level, Shiv Nadar IoE offers study and benefit fully from the program. The
experience at Shiv Nadar waste management and in modern chemical safety, the following programs: Integrated B.Sc.-M. integrated programs and the Ph.D. program
IoE includes synthesis of laboratory safety including, to understand responsible Sc. (Research), Integrated B.Sc.-M.Sc.-Ph.D., in chemistry at SNU consists of a rigorous
molecules; measurement facilities for chemical waste disposal techniques, M.Sc. (Research), Integrated M.Sc.-Ph.D. and regimen of both broad-based and in-depth
of chemical properties, disposal, safety information understand and comply with Ph.D. in chemistry. Foundation courses in course work, development of project proposals,
structures, and phenomena; and reference materials, safety regulations, understand the first semester ensure that all students, research and literature seminars, in-depth
hands-on experience and personal protective and use material safety data irrespective of the specialization, possess the dissertation research under the supervision of
with modern analytical equipment available to all sheets (MSDS), recognize and requisite background to complete the course of a research advisor, and a public thesis defense.
instrumentation; and students and faculty. The minimize potential chemical
computational data analysis chemistry laboratories at and physical hazards in the
and modeling. All laboratory SNIoE are equipped with laboratory, and know how to
programs are conducted functioning fume hoods, prevent and ability to handle
in a safe environment that safety showers, eyewashes, laboratory emergencies
CHEMISTRY
includes adherence to first aid kits, and fire effectively.
national; and state regulations extinguishers are readily
CAREERS
PROBLEM-SOLVING
Chemistry offers good career opportunities and related platforms do provide solutions
SKILLS
for high quality graduates, in industry as well to life sciences, biotechnology and health-
as in academia, in developed markets in India care sectors; as well as R & D institutes and
As part of the Shiv Nadar IoE experience, students are expected to develop the ability to
and abroad such as the US, Europe, Japan academia. Furthermore, chemists find job
define problems, develop testable hypotheses, design and execute experiments, analyze
and Australia - the major employers being: opportunities in various other sectors such as
data using statistical methods, and draw appropriate conclusions. The chemistry curriculum
industries related to agricultural technology, chemical industry, and advancement of career
provides ample opportunities for developing both written and oral communication skills, as
biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, and materials. opportunities in forensic, food science and as
well as team skills. Our instructional programs incorporate team experiences in classroom and
IT industries working on artificial intelligence health professionals.
laboratory components of the chemistry curriculum.
4
5
Opportunities for research in chemistry at Shiv Nadar IoE are available in
the following broad areas:
• Bio-inorganic Chemistry
CHEMISTRY RESEARCH AT
• Catalysis
• Chemical Biology
SHIV NADAR IoE
• Cheminformatics
• Computational Quantum Chemistry
Research activities are not confined to post-graduate level, but are integrated • Chemical & Biology Crystallography
into the under-graduate program at Shiv Nadar IoE through various lab-related • Green Chemistry
components and possibility using Research Experiential & Applied Learning • Materials Chemistry
(REAL) course platform too. Undergraduate research allows students to realize • Medicinal Chemistry
and reinforce chemistry knowledge from their formal course work. It also • Metalloradical Chemistry
assists in developing their scientific and professional skills, and create acumen • Nano-Biotechnology
towards answering out of the box questions. Original research culminating • Natural Product Synthesis
in a comprehensive written report provides an effective pedogogical means • Photoelectrochemistry
for integrating undergraduate learning experiences, and allows students to • Polymer Chemistry
participate directly in the process of learning. • Protein Chemistry
• Supramolecular Chemistry
• Synthetic Organic Chemistry
• Ultrafast Spectroscopy and Chemical Dynamics
The specific research areas covered in the department can be found out from
the departmental website:
(https://chemistry.snu.edu.in/research/areas-research)
6
7
MAJOR IN MINOR IN
CHEMISTRY CHEMISTRY
The basic undergraduate degree program offered by the Department of Chemistry is the Bachelor Undergraduate students of the university who are not majoring in Chemistry have the option to
of Science: B.Sc. (Research) in Chemistry. In addition, Department of Chemistry also offers B.Sc. take a Minor in Chemistry
(Research) (with Specialization) in any of the arena (Material Chemistry/ Computational Chemistry/
Chemical Biology).
Academic Requirements for Chemistry Minor:
Every chemistry undergraduate student of the University is required to take a number of credits
27 credits = 24 credits in compulsory courses [12 Introductory (Category A) + 12 Foundation
from various courses as classified into the following categories:
(Category B)] + 3 credits of Chemistry In-Depth/Elective courses (Category C).
• CCC (Common Core Curriculum courses offered by the university)
• UWE (University Wide Electives; courses so designated and offered by departments other
than Chemistry)
Category Course Course Title L:T:P Credits
• Introductory Chemistry courses (CHY100 – 199)
• Foundation Chemistry courses (CHY200 – 299)
Minor
• In-Depth Chemistry courses (CHY300 – 499) Chemical Princi-
A CHY111 3:1:1 12
ples
• Electives/ Advanced Electives (CHY300 – 400 – 599)
Chemical
CHY211 3:0:1
Equilibrium
The credit requirements for B.Sc. (Research) Chemistry are:
Physical Methods
CHY214 2:0:1
• 110 = 73 credits in Core Chemistry Courses (Introductory + Foundation + In-Depth) + 13 in Chemistry
PC(B)M/10 PCB credits (Physics/Life Sciences) + 12 PC(B)M/15 PCB credits (Chemistry Basic Organic
B CHY122 2:1:1 12
Chemistry-I
electives) + 12 credits (Senior project)
Inorganic Chemis-
• For 42 = 18 credits CCC courses + 18 credits UWE courses + 6 credits from either CCC CHY144 3:0:1
try-I
and/or UWE/DSE (Department Specific Elective) Basic Organic
CHY221 2:1:1
Chemistry-II
B.Sc. (Research) in Chemistry with specialization: Our undergraduate chemistry curriculum at Chemistry of Car-
CHY222 3:0:1
bonyl Compounds
Shiv Nadar IoE provides a broad background in chemical principles and knowledge. It is organically
Coordination
cultivated to drive students to explore basic, advanced, and inter- / multi-disciplinary areas of CHY242 3:0:1
Chemistry
chemistry and related subjects. Unlike the traditional B.Sc. program, the B.Sc. (Research) program
Inorganic Chemis-
CHY245 2:1:1
involves a year of research in state-of-the-art research labs to seed and promote the importance of try-II
CHY311 Chemical Binding 3:1:0
research, a highlighting point of our curriculum. Besides the standalone B.Sc. (Research) program,
Molecular Spec-
the department has additionally introduced specialization in three upcoming fields: CHY313 3:1:0
troscopy
A course from "category B" cannot count towards both Major and Minor requirements. For example, Biotechnology
• Material Chemistry students cannot count CHY122 towards the Minor degree as it is a compulsory course in their Major.
Any course from
• Computational Chemistry
C CHYXYZ Chemistry course 3:0:0 3
• Chemical Biology. catalogue
This specialization endorses a more focused approach and early boarding in emerging research
Credits 27
areas to pursue aspiring careers in both academia and industry.
8
9
CHY103: MATHEMATICS FOR CHEMISTRY-I
CHEMISTRY
(4 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES + 1 TUTORIAL ) MONSOON
COURSE
This course will introduce the students to various basic mathematical methods for chemists.
The methods involve the basics of calculus, vectors and matrices, first and second-order
differential equations and their solution, series, and complex numbers. The course will have
CATALOGUE:
lectures and tutorial classes with several practice sessions. On successful completion of the
course, students will have:
• Sufficient knowledge of mathematics needed for Chemistry.
The chemistry program at Shiv Nadar IoE provides both a broad background in chemical principles
• Understanding of the mathematical concepts necessary for Physical science as well.
and in-depth study of chemistry or chemistry-related areas that build on this background. The
• Develop capability to solve numerical problems related to physical chemistry and basic
chemistry curriculum is divided into three parts: (1) the introductory chemistry experience, (2)
physics.
foundation course work that provides breadth, and (3) rigorous in-depth course work that builds
on the foundation. Because chemistry is an experimental science, substantial laboratory work is an
integral part of this experience.
Course Content
Functions of a Single Variable (Differentiation): Functions, Continuity, Differentiation, odd and
even functions.
INTRODUCTORY OR GENERAL CHEMISTRY
Functions of a Single Variable (Integration): Definition of an integral, Methods of Integration,
The introductory or general chemistry experience
Improper integrals, Integration by parts, Integration by substitution.
plays a vital role in educating all students. The
introductory courses provide a common background
Functions of Several Variables: Partial derivatives, Total differentials, Chain rules for partial
for students with a wide range of high school
differentiation, Euler’s theorem, the Dirac Delta Function. Multiple integrals.
experiences, and allow a period for consolidation
of chemical concepts, as well as mathematical and
Ordinary Differential Equations: : Linear first-order differential equations, Homogeneous and
laboratory skills. For students pursuing a chemistry
Inhomogeneous linear differential equations with constant coefficients.
major, the introductory chemistry courses provide
preparation for the foundation course work, ensuring
Plane Polar Coordinates and Spherical Coordinates: : Plane polar coordinates, Spherical
that students know basic chemical concepts such
coordinates
as stoichiometry, states of matter, atomic structure,
Prerequisites: None
molecular structure and bonding, thermodynamics,
equilibria, and kinetics. Students also need to be
competent in basic laboratory skills such as good
laboratory practices, maintaining and recording
data in a notebook, use of electronic balances and
volumetric glasswares, preparation of solutions,
chemical measurements etc.
10
11
CHY104: MATHEMATICS FOR CHEMISTRY-II CHY111: CHEMICAL PRINCIPLES
(4 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES + 2 TUTORIAL ) SPRING (5 CREDITS: 4 LECTURES/TUTORIAL + 3-HOUR LAB) MONSOON
This course will introduce the students to various basic mathematical methods for chemists. This course will focus on introductory chemical principles, including periodicity, chemical
The methods involve some advanced concepts of calculus, numerical methods, probability bonding, atomic and molecular structure, equilibrium and principles of various analytical
and statistical methods, polynomials etc. Students in 1st and 2nd year B Sc (Research) in techniques. Students will explore stoichiometric relationships in solution and gas systems,
Chemistry are encouraged to take this course. Course will have lectures and tutorial classes which are the basis for quantifying the results of chemical reactions. Understanding
with several practice sessions. chemical reactivity leads directly into discussion of equilibrium and thermodynamics, two
of the most important ideas in chemistry. Equilibrium, especially acid/base applications,
explores the extent of reactions while thermodynamics helps understanding if a reaction
Course Content
will happen. The fundamentals of organic chemistry will be discussed that includes origin of
organic compounds, functional groups, substitution and elimination reaction and basics of
Functions of Several Variables: Finding critical points for single and double-variate functions
stereochemistry and name reactions.
Series and Limits: Power Series, Taylor series, Maclaurin Series. Convergence and divergence
Course Content
of infinite series, Complex Fourier Series.
Unit-1: Atomic structure, Periodic table, VSEPR, Molecular Orbital Theory and Spectroscopy:
Vectors and Gradients: Representation of vectors, Products of vectors, Basic vector calculus,
a) Introduction atomic structure, concept of atom, molecules, Rutherford’s atomic model, Bohr’s
the axioms of a vector space, Linear independence, Inner product spaces, Complex inner
model of an atom, wave model, classical and quantum mechanics, wave particle duality of
product spaces.
electrons, Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, Quantum-Mechanical model of atom, The Bohr’s
theory of the hydrogen atom and spectra.
Complex Numbers: Complex numbers and the complex plane, Euler’s Formula and the polar
b) Concept of Atomic Orbitals, representation of electrons move in three-dimensional space,
form of complex numbers.
wave function (), Radial and angular part of wave function, radial and angular nodes, Shape of
orbitals, the principal (n), angular (l), and magnetic (m) quantum numbers, Pauli exclusion principle.
Determinants: Definition of a determinant, Properties of determinants.
c) Orbital Angular Momentum (l), Spin Angular Momentum (s), HUND’s Rule, The aufbau principle.
d) Shielding Effect, Effective Nuclear Charge, Slater’s rule
Matrices: Matrix algebra, Inverse of a matrix, Orthogonal matrices, Unitary matrices, Matrix
e) Periodic properties elements
eigenvalue problems and Diagonalization of matrix.
f) Lewis structures
g) Valence shell electron pair repulsion (VSEPR)
Probability: Discrete distributions, The multinomial distribution, Continuous distributions,
h) Valence-Bond theory (VB), Orbital Overlap, Hybridization, Molecular Orbital Theory (MO) of
Joint probability distributions.
homo-nuclear diatomic molecules.
i) Molecular Orbital Theory of hetero-nuclear diatomic molecules.
Numerical Methods: Roots of equations, Systems of linear algebraic equations.
j) Spectroscopy: Basic of atomic and molecular spectroscopy, regions of the spectrum:
Radiofrequency (NMR/EPR, change of spin), Microwave (rotational Spectra), Infra-red (vibrational
Prerequisites: Mathematics for Chemists-I (CHY103)
spectra), UV-Vis (electronic spectra)
k) Bond energies of various single and double bond and their vibrational frequency values in IR.
Vibrational Spectroscopy of simple Harmonic oscillators like H , O , N , HCl, CO, NO, and CO ,
2 2 2 2
degree of freedom, stretching and bending.
l) IR spectra of different functional groups such as -OH, -NH , -CO2H etc.
2
m) UV-Vis Spectroscopy of organic molecules, Electronic Transitions, Beer-Lambert Law,
Chromophores.
12
13
Unit-2: The Principles of Chemical Equilibrium and Kinetics: h) Compounds containing single bonds: conformational and configuration isomerism.
Isomerism in (ethane, butane and cyclohexanol for mono and di-substituted)
a) Thermodynamic System & Surroundings: Introduction
i) Chirality: Concept of chirality (up to two carbon atoms), chiral, achiral, optical isomerism,
b) Laws of Thermodynamics: Zeroth Law, First Law (Heat & Work; State and Path Functions; enantiomers and diastereomers, R and S nomenclature with C.I.P rules, optical activity,
Different Thermodynamic Processes; Thermal Process using an ideal gas; Specific Heat rotation, racemic mixture
capacities; Enthalpy; Thermochemistry (Hess’s law)), Second Law: Entropy (Heat Engines;
Carnot’s Principle and the Carnot Engine; Refrigerators and Air Conditioners), Third Law j) Compounds containing double bonds: Geometrical isomerism: cis–trans, Z and E, notations
(Variation of Entropy with Temperature, Pressure and Volume; Absolute Entropy; Standard with C.I.P rules.
Molar Entropy; Calculation of Entropy; Probability and Entropy), Energy (Gibbs and
Helmholtz; Maxwell Relations). Lab Schedule:
Exp. No. Experiment Name
c) Phase Equilibrium: Phase Diagram; Gibbs Phase Rule; Degrees of Freedom; Phases.
1 Introduction to lab/ Grading scheme/Safety Rules
2 Safety Quiz - Displaying Data Graphically
d) Chemical Equilibrium: Equilibrium Law.
3 Expt.1- Sugar Content of Common Drinks
4 Expt.2- Stoichiometry of H2O2 decomposition
e) Chemical Kinetics: Rate of a reaction, rate law and specific rate constant, integrated rate
5 Expt.3- Determination of Conc. of an Unknown coloured soln.
equations and half-life (zero, first and second order reactions), Time constant, Activation
6 Expt.4- Total Hardness of Water
energy, Arrhenius equation.
7 Expt.5- Synthesis of Nylon
Make-up-week
f) Catalysis: Homogeneous and Heterogeneous - Basics, Characteristics and Features.
8 Expt.6- Recycling Aluminium foil / Technique Grade
9 Expt.7- Analysis of Common Functional Groups
Unit-3: Organic Chemistry:
10 Expt.8- Synthesis of aspirin / Technique Grade
11 Expt.9- Analysis of aspirin
a) Introduction to organic chemistry: Examples of various organic chemicals of natural and
12 Make-up-week
industrial importance, Bulk vs fine chemicals
Prerequisite: None.
b) Functional group: Types and nature
c) Physical properties of organic compounds: A general view on physical properties of
organic compounds with variation of functional groups: melting point and boiling point, Achievements
solubility, acidity and basicity, dipole moment, colour (resonance, phenolphthalein, nature
pigments), alkanes vs polyethylene, fun facts (proteins, natural acid, fats) • Selected for a one-year research project,
Case Western Reserve University USA,
2021-22.
d) Substitution reactions: S 1 and S 2
N N
• Accepted by the University of Michigan-
Chemistry Opportunities for Research and
e) Elimination reactions: Hoffmann and Saytzeff elimination
Education (M|CORE) program, 2021
f) Name reactions: Markownikoff and Anti-Markownikoff reaction (ionic vs. free radical
Malavika Ramkumar
addition)
(2022 Batch)
g) Stereochemistry: definition, classification in isomerism
14
15
CHY114: MOLECULAR MODELLING Case Study: Force-Field Parametrization of simple Organic Molecules
(2 CREDITS: 1 LECTURES + 2 HOUR LAB) SPRING
Computer Simulation and Structure-based De Novo Ligand Design: Introduction, Calculations
The importance of spatial visualization and model thinking in chemistry cannot be of simple Thermodynamical Properties, Molecular Dynamics Simulations (Molecular Dynamics
overemphasized. This course aims to provide students with a working understanding of the Using Simple Models, Constraint Dynamics, Conformational Changes from Molecular Dynamics
use of computers in modern chemistry practice, and enable them to develop their skills in Simulations)
visualizing molecular models. It will also introduce students to the Linux operating system,
and for those without prior programming experience, introduce them to algorithmic thinking Analysing the Results of the Simulations and Estimating errors: Molecular Docking
and help them develop programming skills. (Introduction, Scoring Functions, Applications of Docking
Course Content
Case Study: Setting up a Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Insulin in water as a Solvent
Computational tools for Molecular Modelling: The Linux Operating system, Useful
Prerequisites: Chemical Principles (CHY111).
Commands, Linux Shell and Shell Scripting, Useful Hardware and Software for Molecular
Modelling
CHY122: BASIC ORGANIC CHEMISTRY I
Concepts in Molecular Modelling: Chemical Drawing (Chemical Drawing with ChemDraw, (4 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES+ 1 TUTORIAL + 3 HOUR LAB) SPRING
Three Dimensional Effects in Chemical Structures, Representation of Optical isomerism)
The course is designed to assist a swift transition of the knowledge acquired by students
Molecular Structure Databases [Cambridge structural Database (CSD), Protein Data during school level to university level. The further advancement of in-depth knowledge in
Bank(PDB), File format and information in PDB and CSD databases] organic chemistry subject is designed via a stepwise procession from basic introductory level
to advance level in subsequent years. The course covers the fundamental aspects of the
Molecular Modelling (Molecular Graphics, 3-D Models of Organics and Biomolecules, basic organic chemistry principles via structure analysis approach. Students are required to
Coordinate systems, Potential Energy Surfaces complete all the assignments individually with a critical thinking. Practicals are designed to
provide further insight on theoretical knowledge.
Case Study: Visualization of 3D Models with Gauss View/Avogadro/Chemcraft This is a required course for Chemistry majors, but also satisfies UWE requirements for non-
majors.
Introduction to Perl (Data types, Arrays and lists, Control structures, Regular expressions,
Input/output and file handling)
Course Content
Intermolecular forces of attraction: van der Waals forces, ion-dipole, dipole-dipole and
Empirical Force Field Models (Molecular Mechanics): Balls on Springs (Vibrational Motion,
hydrogen bonding, Homolytic and heterolytic bond fission. Hybridization- Bonding,
Force law, a simple Diatomic Molecule, Morse Potential
Electron displacements: Inductive, electromeric, resonance, hyperconjugation effect,
Reaction intermediate- their shape and stability: carbocations, carbanions, free
Force Fields (Bonded Terms in Force Field, Non-bonded Terms, Effective Pair Potential,
radicals, carbenes, benzyne, Acidity and basicity of organic molecules: Alkanes/Alkenes,
Hydrogen Bonding in Molecular Mechanics
Alcohols/Phenols/Carboxylic acids, Amines pKa, pKb. Electrophiles and nucleophiles.
Nucleophilicity and Basicity, Aromaticity and Tautomerism, Molecular chirality and
Applications of Molecular Mechanics: Force-field parameterization for Biological systems,
Isomerism: Cycloalkanes (C3 to C8) Relative stability, Baeyer strain theory and Sachse
Inorganic molecules and Solid state systems, Solvent Modelling in Molecular mechanism,
Mohr theory, conformations and conformational analysis: Ethane, n-butane, ethane
Calculating Thermodynamics Properties using Molecular Mechanics, Energy Minimisation
derivatives, cyclohexane, monosubstituted and disubstituted cyclohexanes and their relative
and Exploring Energy Surface
stabilities. Stereochemistry (Structural- and Stereo-isomerism), Molecular representations:
Newman, Sawhorse, Wedge & Dash, Fischer projections and their inter conversions,
16
17
Geometrical isomerism in unsaturated and cyclic systems: cis–trans and, syn-anti isomerism, E/Z
notations. Geometrical isomerism in dienes- Isolated and conjugated systems, determination
CHY144: INORGANIC CHEMISTRY-I
of configurations, Chirality and optical isomerism: Configurational isomers. Molecules with one
(3 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES + 1 LAB) SPRING
or two chiral centres- constitutionally symmetrical and unsymmetrical molecules; Enantiomers
and diastereomers. Optical activity, disymmetry, meso compounds, racemic modifications
This course aims at helping the student to understand the concept of chemical bonding and
and methods of their resolution; stereochemical nomenclature: erythro/threo, D/L and
acid-base.
R/S nomenclature in acyclic systems. Measurement of optical activity: specific rotation.
Monosaccharides (Nomenclature, Fischer Projections and D/L notation, Open chain and cyclic
Course Content
structure of pentose, hexose sugars, determination of configuration/ absolute, mutarotation.
Lab Schedule:
Chemical bonding: Molecular structure and bonding: Fazan’s Rule, VSEPR, BENT’s rule,
S. No Experiments Involvement of d orbital in hybridization, How VSEPR theory is different from hybridization
concept, Valence bond theory - homonuclear diatomic molecules - polyatomic molecules,
1 Introduction to lab/ grading scheme/safety Rules
Molecular orbital theory of heteronuclear diatomic molecules (CO, NO, HF etc.), bond
2 Expt.1- Intermolecular forces properties, polyatomic molecules, concept of HOMO, LUMO and SOMO; Metallic Bond:
Expt.2- Calibration of a thermometer & - Melting point and boiling point determination of unknown Qualitative idea of valence bond and band theories. Semiconductors and insulators, defects in
3
organic compounds (Kjeldahl method and electrically heated melting point apparatus)
solids. Weak Chemical Forces: Hydrogen bonding (theories of hydrogen bonding, valence bond
4 Expt.3- Acidity and basicity: pHmetry using a Vernier probe vs volumetric titration treatment), receptor-guest interactions, Halogen bonds. Effects of chemical force, melting and
boiling points, Inert-pair effect, Borane chemistry (Structure and bonding), Bonding of noble
5 Expt.4- Separation of an acidic and a neutral substance by extraction in microscale
gas compounds, Defects in solids. Stoichiometric defect: Schottky and Frenkel defects, Non-
6 Expt.5 - Separation of an acidic, a basic and a neutral substance by extraction in macroscale stoichiometric imbalance in crystals (outline). Crown ether complexes of alkali metals.
7 Make-up-week
Acid-Base: Introduction, Theories of acids-bases: Arrhenius theory, Bronsted-Lowry theory,
Conjugate Acid-Base pairs, Solvent system definition, Lux concept, Lewis theory, Properties
8 Expt.6 - Paper chromatography for separation of amino acids
of Lewis Acids and Bases, Complex formation in acid-base reaction, Gas-phase proton affinity,
10 Expt.7 - Thin layer and column chromatography.
acids and bases in water, levelling effect, general strength of acid and base; the concept of Hard
and Soft Acids and Bases (HSAB), Magic Acids/Superacids.
12 Expt.8 - Synthesis and characterization: recrystallization (Schötten Baumann reaction)
General principle of equilibrium, equilibrium in solutions of acids and bases: strong acids and
13 Expt.9 - To find the optical rotation of a chiral molecules strong bases, weak acids and weak bases, polyprotic acids and bases, the equilibrium constant,
Strength of acids and bases in aqueous solution in terms of Ka, Kb; the pH scale, pKw, pKa, pKb,
14 Expt.10 - NMR experiment
etc. (numerical problems).
15 Make-up-week Aqueous solutions of salts, hydrolysis of salts, equilibrium in hydrolysis of salts: salts derives
from weak acids and strong bases, salts derives from strong acids and weak bases, salts derives
Prerequisite: Chemical Principles (CHY111).
from weak acids and weak bases, numerical problems on hydrolysis of salts.
Achievement Buffer solutions: pH of a buffer solution, Henderson equations (numerical problems).
Acid-base titrations: choice of indicator, neutralization of a strong acid by a strong base,
Summer Research Student at
neutralization of a weak acid with a strong base, neutralization of a weak base with a strong
Nanyang Technological University (Singapore)
from May to July 2022. Selected through NTU acid, neutralization of a weak acid by a weak base, neutralization of a weak acid with a strong
India Connect programme. base - neutralization of a weak base with a strong acid - neutralization of polyprotic acids with
strong base.
Sanjana Maheshwari
(2023 Batch)
PhD Offer in Astrochemistry,
Solid–Solution Equilibrium: Solubility and solubility product (Ksp), common ion effect, effect of
The University of Maryland, College Park
H+/OH– and complexing agents. Application of the concept in qualitative analysis; calculation
18
19
CHY211: CHEMICAL EQUILIBRIUM
on pH condition and precipitation.
(5 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES + 1 TUTORIAL + 3 HOUR LAB) MONSOON
Oxidation and Reduction: redox equilibrium and ion–electron method of balancing redox
equations, disproportionation relations. Chemistry in Non-aqueous solvents (Common non-
This course is deigned to understand thermodynamic principles already familiar to
aqueous solvents, the solvent concept, coordination model, chemistry in liquid NH3, liquid HF,
students from earlier courses. The course will culminate with an introduction to statistical
SOCl2, liquid H2SO4, fluorosulfonic acids, N2O4, and SO2).
thermodynamic and molecular reaction dynamics. The course content will be exemplified
using various real examples/case studies.
Lab Schedule:
S. No Experiments
Course Content
1 Expt.1- Analysis of mixture of carbonate and bicarbonate
2 Expt.2- Permanganometry (Fe2+ and Fe3+ mixture) Kinetic Theory of Gases: Introduction of Kinetic Theory of Gases, Maxwell-Boltzmann
Distribution of Velocities and energy, Effect of Temperature on Energy distribution.
3 Expt.3- Dichromatometry (Fe2+ and Fe3+ mixture, role of indicator)
4 Expt.4- Determination of pKa values of acetic acid and oxalic acid
Phase Equilibria: Phase diagrams and impact on material sciences, Phase transitions, Chemical
5 Make-up-week
equilibrium and its impact on technology and biochemistry, Changes in equilibria with
6 Expt.5- Determination of solubility product temperature and pressure.
7 Expt.6- Partition coefficient of iodine between two immiscible solvents
Colligative properties: Raoult’s Law, Ideal and non-ideal mixtures.
8 Expt.7- Determination of inorganic radicals by flame test, spot test and UV-Vis study in a mixture
9 Expt.8- Determination of concentration of CuSO4 in a solution by UV-Vis
Chemical Kinetics: Determination of rate, order and rate laws, Impact of Chemical Kinetics on
10 Make-up-week Biochemistry, Theories of Reaction rates; Collison theory, thermodynamics theory, statistical
theory, transition state theory-its application and formulation.
Prerequisite: Chemical Principles (CHY111).
Catalysis: Homogenous and Heterogenous Catalysis, General Catalytic Mechanisms; Arrhenius
Intermediate, van’t Hoff Intermediates, Activation energies, Acid-Base Catalysis; Mechanism,
FOUNDATION
Catalytic Activity, Salt effects, Enzyme Catalysis; Effect of Substrate, effect of pH, effect of
COURSES temperature, Enzyme Mechanism.
Chemistry of Solutions and Surfaces: Osmosis and reverse osmosis; Osmotic Pressure and
Foundation courses provides breadth and lays the groundwork for the in-depth course work effect of Vapour pressure lowering, Adsorption and Chromatography, Effect of temperature
in each of the five major areas of chemistry: analytical chemistry, biochemistry, inorganic and pressure, Langmuir Isotherm, Gibbs Adsorption Isotherm, Ion Exchange columns and water
chemistry, organic chemistry, and physical chemistry. The chemistry laboratory experience purification.
at Shiv Nadar IoE includes synthesis of molecules; measurement of chemical properties,
structures, and phenomena. Students get hands-on experience with modern instrumentation
on a variety of analytical instruments, including spectrometers, and are expected to
understand the operation and theory of modern instruments and use them to solve chemical
problems as part of their laboratory experience.
20
21
Lab Schedule:
S. No Experiments CHY214: PHYSICAL METHODS IN CHEMISTRY
1 Safety rules/quiz; Download Vernier 3.8 for next week (3 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES + 2 HOUR LAB) MONSOON
2 Expt.1- Determine Keq for (KSCN) + Fe(NO3)3
3 Expt.2- Determination of Enthalpy (Bleach-Acetone)
Analyses of compounds are an integral aspect of chemistry. We get to know the structure,
4 Expt.3- Determination of equilibrium constant for Bromocresol Green
spatial orientation and purity of compounds we synthesize through analysis, which helps us
5 Expt.4- Acid Rain experiment
to advance in our investigation. To address this purpose a bevy of instruments ranging from
Make up week
UV spectroscopy, IR spectroscopy to High Pressure Liquid Chromatography are available.
6 Expt.5- Arrhenius equation using KMnO4 – Oxalic Acid
9 Expt.8- Order of reaction with respect to Crystal Violet (Crystal Violet-OH-) However accurately understanding the output from these instruments is an essential attribute
10 Expt.9- Order of reaction with respect to OH- (Crystal Violet- OH-) for a successful chemist. The purpose of this course is to familiarize the students with the
11 Expt.10- Crystal Violet-OH- (Arrhenius) basic principles of spectroscopic and diffraction methods that are instrumental to the analysis
Make up week
of molecules and structures in the day-to-day life of a chemist. In this course, we will learn to
VIVA
interpret and understand working of various types of analytical instruments commonly used for
Prerequisites: Chemical Principles (CHY111). analysis in a chemistry lab.
Course Content
CHY212: CHEMICAL APPLICATIONS OF GROUP THEORY
Unit-1: UV-Visible spectroscopy, Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) MONSOON
(NMR) spectroscopy, Mass spectrometry, Data Analysis
This course deals with a systematic mathematical analysis of symmetry in chemical systems using
A. UV-Visible spectroscopy: Concept of absorption spectroscopy, atomic vs molecular
group theory. Group theory provides considerable insight into the chemical and physical properties
absorptions, concept of color, effect of conjugation. Bathochromic, hypsochromic, hyperchromic
of molecules once its symmetry has been classified. We can determine whether a spectroscopic
and hypochromic shifts.
transition is allowed or forbidden by using selection rules associated with symmetries, and we can
interpret the bands in the Infrared and Raman spectra. Moreover, if the symmetry of the molecular
B. Fluorescence Spectroscopy: Principles of fluorescence, Jablonski Diagram, solvatochromism,
orbital wave function is known, we can learn information about bonding. Some simple applications
Stoke’s shift, Quantum yield, parameters affecting photophysical property.
of group theory in chemistry will be covered in this course.
C. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy: Spinning nucleus, effect of an external
Course Content
magnetic field, precessional motion and precessional frequency, precessional frequency and the
Principles of group theory: Importance of symmetry and group theory in chemistry, Symmetry
field strength, proton NMR spectrum, solvents used in NMR, solvent shift and concentration
elements and symmetry operations, associated symmetry operations, Definition and properties of
effect and hydrogen bonding, deuterium exchange.
group, similarity transformation, class of a group, Point group: molecular point groups (symmetry
classification of molecules), Product of symmetry operations, group multiplication tables,
D. Mass spectrometry: Introduction to mass spectroscopy: isotope effect, fragmentation
Matrix representation of symmetry operations, Matrix representation of point groups, character
patterns. McLafferty rearrangements, chemical ionization.
representation of point group, Reducible representation and irreducible representation of point
group, Great Orthogonality Theorem, character table.
E. Data Analysis: Uncertainties, errors, mean, standard deviation, least square fit.
Application of group theory in chemistry: Projection operator, symmetry adapted linear
Unit-2: Microwave and Vibrational spectroscopy, Chromatography
combinations (SALC), Molecular orbital for sigma bonding, Molecular orbitals for pi bonding, Direct
product representation, Basics of infrared and Raman spectroscopy, Infrared and Raman active
F. Microwave or Rotational Spectroscopy: Principal axes of rotation and three principal
modes of molecular vibrations, Mutual exclusion principle, some illustrative examples, Basics of
moments of inertia, Classification of molecules based on moments of inertia, Rigid (diatomic)
electronic spectroscopy, Selection rules of spectroscopic transitions.
rotator model, Rotational energy levels and rotational selection rule and transitions, Rotational
Prerequisites: Chemical Principles (CHY111); Mathematics for Chemists-I (CHY103)/(MAT103).
spectra of carbon monoxide and water vapor, Basic instrumentation of rotational spectroscopy.
22
23
G. Infra-Red spectroscopy: Molecular vibrations, Modes of vibration, Factors influencing
CHY221: BASIC ORGANIC CHEMISTRY-II
vibrational frequencies: coupling of vibrational frequencies, hydrogen bonding, electronic
(4 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES + 1 TUTORIAL + 3-HOUR LAB) MONSOON
effects, The Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometer, Calibration of the Frequency Scale,
Absorbance and Transmittance scale, intensity and position of IR bands, fingerprint region, and
interpretation of IR spectra of simple organic molecules, basic mention of Raman Spectroscopy
including the mutual exclusion principle, Raman and IR active modes of CO2.
Answer to the question, “Why the reaction proceeds via one mechanism despite so many
pathways are possible?” will be provided. The course will assist to utilise the nomenclature,
H. Chromatography: Principle of chromatography, Thin Layer chromatography (TLC), High-
structures, functionalities, properties of organic structures to determine probable reaction
Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC), Liquid chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-
MC), Application of chromatography. mechanisms. Assignments are designed in such a way to illustrate their problem solving skills
using basics of organic chemistry with a critical thinking. Practicals are designed to allow a
Single-crystal X-ray Diffraction (Small molecules & Macromolecules) & Thermal
good coverage and hands on experience on basic lab skills synthesis and purification. There
Characterization:
will be continuous practice sessions during the class hours.
I. X-ray Diffraction: X-ray generation, Classification and Sources; Diffraction of X-rays, Bragg’s
Law; Lattice, Planes and Miller indices; Introduction on Point group and space group; Crystal Course Content
growth (small molecules & proteins); Selection of Single-crystals; Data collection strategy; Organic reactions; nucleophilic substitution, elimination, addition and electrophilic aromatic
Overview of data analysis and preliminary structure determination.
substitution reactions with examples will be studied. A brief description on methods of
preparation of alkyl halides will be provided followed by
J. Thermal characterization: Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and Thermo Gravimetric
Analysis (TGA).
Substitution reactions: Nucleophilic substitution vs. elimination. Free radical halogenation,
Lab Schedule: relative reactivity and selectivity principle, Allylic and benzylic bromination, Nucleophilic
S. No Experiments Subsititution (S 1, S 2, S 1′, S 2′, SNi) mechanisms with stereochemical aspects and effect
N N N N
Unit-1
of solvent etc., examples. Bredt’s rule, Electrophilic aromatic substitution will be studied
1 Expt.1- Introduction to UV-Vis/photoluminescence/NMR and Grading scheme/Safety Rules
in detail, Electrophilic Substitution (S Ar, Addition Elimination vs. Elimination addition)
N
2 Expt.2- Characterization of various solvents by UV-Vis technique - Displaying Data Graphically
(including preparation from diazonium salts). Relative reactivity of alkyl, allyl, benzyl, vinyl
3 Expt.3- Characterization of various organic dyes by UV-Vis technique- Displaying Data Graphically
and aryl halides towards nucleophilic substitution reactions.
4 Expt.4- Characterization of various organic luminescence dyes by photoluminescence spectrometer-
Displaying Data Graphically
5 Expt.5- Characterization of various organic molecules by NMR technique- Displaying Data Graphically Elimination reactions: Formation of alkenes and alkynes by elimination reactions,
6 Expt.6- Determination of molecular mass of organic compounds Mechanism of E1, E2, E1cB reactions, Saytzeff and Hofmann eliminations
Unit-2
7 Expt.7- IR: Determination of Functional Groups
Addition reactions: To begin with, chemistry of Alkanes sigma bonds will be atught,
8 Expt.8- IR: Determination of Functional Groups
Chemistry of alkanes: Formation of alkanes, Organometallic reagents, Wurtz reaction,
9 Expt.9- Identification of stretching, bending and combination bands of water
Wurtz-Fittig reactions, their utilty.
10 Expt.10- Study of isotope effect using IR spectroscopy
11 Expt.11- TLC/HPLC Experiment: Working principle and demonstration
12 Expt.12- TLC/HPLC Experiment: Separation of small molecules Alkenes and alkynes pi bonds: Electrophilic additions their mechanisms (Markownikoff/
Unit-3 Anti-Markownikoff addition), Mechanism of oxymercuration-demercuration, hydroboration
13 Expt.13- Sample preparation and crystallization (Small molecule) oxidation, ozonolysis, reduction, 1,2-and Addition reactions: 1,4-addition reactions in
14 Expt.14- Small molecule crystal selection, data collection
conjugated dienes and Diels-Alder reaction; electrophilic and nucleophilic additions.
15 Expt.15- Small molecule structure determination
Hydration to form carbonyl compounds, alkylation of terminal alkynes.
16 Expt.16- Sample preparation and Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) and Thermogravimetric
Analysis (TGA) experiments (small molecule)
17 Expt.16- DSC and TGA data analyses and interpretations
Prerequisites: Chemical Principles (CHY111).
24
25
Lab Schedule: CHY222: CHEMISTRY OF CARBONYL COMPOUNDS
(4 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES + 1 TUTORIAL + 3 HOUR LAB) SPRING
S. No. Experiments
1 Introduction to the lab notebook requirements and grading
Structure and bonding in carbonyl groups, reactivity, nucleophilic addition and substitution
2 Expt.1- Separation of two compounds, purification by recrystallization, Thin Layer Chromatography,
reactions at the carbonyl centre, a-anion chemistry, chemistry of active methylene compounds
Column Chromatography.
and redox reactions involving carbonyl groups are covered in this course.
3 Expt.2- Nucleophilic substitution bimolecular reaction (SN2).
4 Expt.3- Nucleophilic substitution unimolecular reaction (SN1).
Course Content
5 Expt.4- Oxidation of benzaldehyde to benzoic acid.
Introduction to carbonyl compounds: structure and bonding in carbonyl compounds,
6 Expt.5- Borohydride reduction of a ketone: hydrobenzoin from benzil.
acidity and basicity-pKa of carbonyls, tautomerism in carbonyl compounds - the keto-
7 Make up week/VIVA
enol equilibrium, reactivity of carbonyl group, how to write reaction mechanism
8 Expt.6- Benzoylation of a given compound
9 Expt.7- Halogenation of acetanilide/benzanilide
Nucleophilic-electrophilic reactivity of carbonyl compounds: chemistry of enols and enolates,
10 Expt.8- Bromination of stilbene
addition–dehydration (Aldol reaction); ester condensation (Claisen reaction), fragmentation of
11 Expt.9- Synthesis of dye. Recording UV-Vis in different media. β-dicarbonyls, alkylation of enolates
12 Expt.10- Alkylation of saccharin with iodoethane
13 Make up week/VIVA Nucleophilic substitutions on the carbonyl group-The carboxylic acid family: reactivity of
carboxylic acid family, esters and thioesters- synthesis, structure and reactivity, amides-
Prerequisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-I (CHY122). synthesis, structure and reactivity, acyl halides and anhydrides- synthesis, structure and
reactivity, organometallic reagents-Grignard reaction & and alkyl lithium, enantiomeric
resolution
Achievement Oxidation-reduction reactions of carbonyl compounds: Enantiomeric resolution, oxidation of
carbonyls -Jones oxidation, Oppenauer oxidation, functional group interconversion through
oxidation; reduction of carbonyls: NaBH4/LiAlH4/diborane reduction, Cannizaro reaction,
Selected for the Summer Internship as
FRT scholars as part of The Australian National MPV reduction, Clemmensen reduction, Wolff-Kishner reaction, Rosenmund reduction, DIBAL
University, FRT program 2023 reduction, reduction of acids, amines and nitriles.
Nucleophilic additions to carbonyl groups: Cyanohydrin formation, acetals, ketals and hydrates,
Grignard reaction, reaction with alkyl lithium, reactions with nitrogen nucleophiles-imine and
hydrazine formation, nucleophilic addition to carbonyl analogues-cyanides, imines etc.
S. Nishanthini
(2024 Batch) Lab Schedule:
S. No. Experiments
1 Introduction to the lab notebook requirements and grading
2 Expt.1- Osazone reaction: Identification of an unknown Sugar (addition reaction)
3 Expt.2- Preparation of Dibenzylideneacetone (Aldol condensation)
4 Expt.3- Synthesis of Isopentyl acetate (Esterification)
5 Expt.4- Benzilic acid from Benzil (Rearrangement reaction)
6 Expt.5- Synthesis of the Commercial Antidepressant Moclobemide (Amide bond formation)
7 Make up week/VIVA
8 Expt.6- Preparation of Benzopinacol from benzophenone (Reduction by Zn metal)
9 Expt.7a Preparation of Benzyl alcohol from Benzaldehyde (Cannizzaro Reaction)
10 Expt.7b Preparation of Benzoic acid from Benzaldehyde (Cannizzaro Reaction)
11 Expt.8 Estimation of Vitamin C (Iodometric method)
12 Make up week/VIVA
Prerequisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-I (CHY122) and Basic Organic Chemistry-II (CHY221).
26
27
CHY 241: ELECTROCHEMISTRY CHY242: COORDINATION CHEMISTRY
(2 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES) MONSOON (4 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES + 1 LAB) SPRING
This course aims at helping the student to understand the basic of electrochemistry. The This course will focus on the basic concept of coordination chemistry and their quantification
course covers the fundamentals of electrochemistry. in photophysical and magnetic properties. Students will synthesize interesting transition
metal based coordination complexes and perform reactions to promote the understanding
Course Content of common reactions for complexation. After successful synthesis, characterisation of the
Introduction: General discussion about oxidation and reduction, electron transfer vs atom synthesised materials will be performed by using analytical and spectroscopic techniques,
transfer, oxidation no, concept of electrochemistry, such as thin layer chromatography (TLC), ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis), infrared (IR) and nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. After characterization, interpretation of the
Electrochemical cell: Electrodes, salt bridge and its function etc. battery; types of cell: results, such as extent of reaction, purity of product and photophysical property particularly
electrolytic cell vs. galvanic cell; concentration cell vs chemical cell, How to construct a colour of the coordination complexes will be learnt.
voltaic cell?
Definition: Electrode potential, Std. potential and Formal potential; Physical significance of
Course Content
electrode potential. Introduction: Meaning of metal coordination and use of metal coordination in biology and
materials science.
Types of electrodes: (i) metal electrode, advantage of amalgam electrode; (ii) non-metal
electrode, e.g. hydrogen gas electrode, glassy carbon electrode. Structures of complexes: nomenclature, coordination number, bonding of organic ligands to
transition metals, coordination number, linage isomerism, electronic effects, steric effects,
Electroanalytical techniques: Potentiometry, Coulometry, Voltammetry and Amperometry. geometry, Fluxional molecule.
Fundamentals of Electrochemistry: Electrical dimensions and unit, Faraday’s laws of Chelate and Macrocylic effect: stability, free energy, enthalpy, entropy of complexation,
electrolysis, Theory of electrolytic dissociation, van’t Hoff factor and degree of dissociation, mimicking natural systems (chlorophyll, porphyrin, etc.) and applications.
Specific Conductance, Equivalent conductance, Equivalent conductance at infinite dilution,
Variation of equivalent conductance with concentration for strong and weak electrolytes, Spectra and Bonding: Molecular orbital (MO) diagram of CO, O , N2, -CN, H O, NH ,
2 2 3
Conductance ratio and degree of dissociation, Equivalent conductance minima, Influence BF , and other related ligands, Valence bond theory: Application and limitations; Crystal
3
of dielectric constant on conductance, Transport no., Kohlrausch’s law, Application of field theory: application and limitation; Molecular orbital theory: Application in-bonding,
ion conductance, Ionic mobility, Influence of temperature on ionic conductance, Ion electronic spectra including MLCT, LMCT, MMCT, LLCT. d-d transition, term symbol, Orgel
conductance and viscosity, Drift Speed, Variation of ionic mobility with ionic size and diagram, Tanabe-Sugano diagram, and spinels chemistry.
hydrodynamic radius, factors affecting the ionic mobility for strong electrolytes, Ionic
Atmosphere, relaxation effect or asymmetry effect, Electrophoretic effect, partial molar Magnetism: Meaning of magnetism, diamagnetic, paramagnetic, ferromagnetic materials,
quantities (briefly), partial molar free energy and chemical potential, Electrolytes as a non and magnetic measurement.
ideal solution, activity coefficient, mean ionic activity, mean ionic molality, mean ionic
activity coefficient, Outline of Debye Huckel theory, Debye Huckel’s limiting law, variation of Chemistry of f-block elements: Periodic trend of oxidation state, physical and chemical
activity coefficient with ionic strength, Nernst equation. properties, electronic spectra, structure, and bonding.
Prerequisite: Chemical Principles (CHY111) and Inorganic Chemistry-I (CHY144)
28
29
Lab Schedule:
2.3. Many body effect and effective pair potential
2.4. Force fields for solvents, Inorganic Molecules, and Solid-state systems
S. No Experiments
1 Expt.1- Preparation and UV-Vis study of simple coordination complexes, such as hexaaquaco- 2.5. Molecular Mechanical Potential for Metals, Semiconductors and Biomolecules
balt(II), hexaaquacopper(II), hexaaquanickel(II) ions
2 Expt.2- Synthesis of [Ni(disalicyaldehyde-1,2-phenylenediamine)] coordination complex
3. Energy minimizations
3 Expt.3- Characterization of [Ni(disalicyaldehyde-1,2-phenylenediamine)] coordination complex
3.1 Introduction of Energy minimization
using IR, UV-Vis, NMR
4 Expt.4- Analysis of [Ni(disalicyaldehyde-1,2-phenylenediamine)] coordination complex 3.2 Derivative and Non-derivative methods
5 Expt.5- Synthesis of [VO(2,4-pentanedione) ] 3.3. First and second order derivative methods
2
6 Expt.6- Characterization of [VO(2,4-pentanedione)2] by using IR, UV-Vis, NMR 3.4. Application of Energy Minimization method
7 Expt.7- Analysis of [VO(2,4-pentanedione) ]
2
8 Expt.8- Preparation and characterization of potassium trioxalatoferrate (III)
4. Quantum mechanical approach in computational chemistry
9 Expt.9- Synthesis of [Cr(2,4-pentanedione) ]
3 4. Quantum mechanical approach in computational chemistry
10 Expt.10- Characterization of [Cr(2,4-pentanedione)3] by using IR, UV-Vis, NMR
4.1 Basics of Quantum Mechanics and the Wave Function.
11 Expt.11- Analysis of [Cr(2,4-pentanedione) ]
3
4.2. The Hamiltonian Operator and Postulates of QM theory
12 Expt.12- Synthesis of [Co(2,4-pentanedione)
3]
13 Expt.13- Characterization of [Co(2,4-pentanedione) ] by using IR, UV-Vis, NMR 4.3. The Born–Oppenheimer Approximation.
3
14 VIVA 4.4. Basis set and Basis Functions.
4.5. Application to the Allyl System
Prerequisite: Chemical Principles (CHY111) and Chemical equilibrium (CHY211).
Prerequisite: Molecular Modelling (CHY114).
FOUNDATION COURSES FOR
CHY223: INTRODUCTIONS TO CHEMICAL BIOLOGY
SPECIALIZATIONS
(2 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES ) MONSOON
Students will learn the structure-function interplay and structural forces in biomacromolecules.
CHY215 INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTATIONAL CHEMISTRY
How DNA gets packed inside the nucleus, how proteins are synthesised, role of biological catalysts
(2 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES ) MONSOON
(enzymes), molecular recognition and electron transfer through metalloproteins. We will also
discuss how DNA and protein gel electrophoresis works. At the end we will look into UV-Visible
This course will introduce the students to various basics of computational chemistry and its spectroscopy of DNA and proteins.
application.
Course Content
Course Content General introduction: What is Chemical Biology? Importance of studying Chemical Biology;
1. Introduction to the computational chemistry Differences between Chemical Biology and Biochemistry; Applications of Chemical Biology.
1.1. Definitions: Computational Chemistry, Theoretical Chemistry, Molecular Modelling and
Chem informatics Structure and function of biomolecules: The basic structure and primary functions of protein and
1.2. Importance and scopes of Computational Chemistry enzyme, carbohydrate and nucleic acids (DNA and RNA). Covalent bonds in macromolecules;
1.3. Molecular Mechanical and Quantum Mechanical Models of Molecules Non-covalent structural forces in macromolecules: electrostatic, van der Waals and dispersion,
1.4. Potential Energy Surface (PES), Maximum and Minimum PES , and Saddle points hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions; Structure of cell membrane: components.
1.5. Computational Chemistry Software
Central Dogma of molecular biology: How Do Cells Make Proteins? What is a ribosome?
2. Molecular mechanical model DNA replication, The replisome, DNA polymerase, Transcription, messenger RNA (mRNA),
2.1. Bonded and Non-bonded Interactions RNA polymerase and transcription factors, splicing,Translation, transfer RNA, Genetic Code,
2.2. Molecular Mechanical Force field Posttranslational modifications.
30
31
Molecular recognition, binding, catalysis, electron transfer: : Molecular recognition and
binding: examples, Antibodies, DNA packaging and expression control, Chromatin Filament to
Chromosome, Catalysis in chemical biology: examples, Simple principles in bio-catalysis, Steady IN-DEPTH
state kinetics outline, Electron transfer: examples, metalloproteins and enzymes.
COURSES
Analysis of biomolecules: Electrophoresis: basic principle, gel electrophoresis of Proteins and
Nucleic Acids, What is SDS-PAGE? Western blot principle; UV-Vis Spectroscopy: basic principle,
Beer’s law, Biological Chromophores. In-depth courses provide not only advanced instruction, but also development of critical
thinking and problem-solving skills and computational data analysis and modelling. Students
Prerequisite: Chemical Principles (CHY111), Basic Organic Chemistry I (CHY122). are expected to be able to define problems clearly, develop testable hypotheses, design and
execute experiments, analyse data using appropriate statistical methods, and draw appropriate
conclusions, applying an understanding of all chemistry sub-disciplines. Students are also
expected to be able to use the peer-reviewed scientific literature effectively and evaluate
CHY243: INTRODUCTION TO MATERIALS CHEMISTRY
technical articles critically, learning how to retrieve specific information from the chemical
(2 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES ) MONSOON
literature, with the use of online, interactive database-searching tools.
This is an introductory course on materials chemistry and focuses on basic and fundamental
properties and chemistry of materials. The aim of this course is to provide a bridge between
molecular to materials chemistry at the undergraduate level. This course will introduce basic
Achievement
principles behind the synthesis, structure, properties, and application of materials with examples of
application in areas such as microelectronics, polymers, and energy technology.
Received the prestigious DAAD-WISE
Fellowship
Course Content
Materials chemistry Basics: What is materials chemistry? Different types of materials; Uses of
materials; approaches to producing new materials; the role of chemistry in materials science.
Aditya Verma
Synthesis and reactions: General background to materials synthesis and isolation; Underlying 4th year Integrated B.Sc.-M.sc.,
principles; starting points for materials synthesis-isolation of elements; principles that underlie Department of Chemistry
materials synthesis; illustrative chemistry of selective nonmetallic elements; combustion method;
solvothermal synthesis, polyol synthesis; electrochemical synthesis; growth mechanism; top-down
and bottom-up approaches; chemical vapor deposition; thermal deposition; agitation methods;
solid state synthesis.
Fundamental principles: Why are different materials different; The role of different elements;
Different types of chemical bonds; size of molecular units; different shapes of component
molecules and influence on solid-state structure; scattering phenomena.
Properties of materials: Band theory; p- and n- type semiconductors; Thermal and electrical
conductivity; electronic, optical, thermal, mechanical and magnetic properties.
Porous materials and Applications: Zeolites, polyoxometalates, COF, MOF, SAPO, ALPO;
separation and storage.
Prerequisite: Chemical Principles (CHY111), Inorganic Chemistry-I (CHY144).
32
33
CHY245: INORGANIC CHEMISTRY-II CHY311: CHEMICAL BINDING/QUANTUM MECHANICS
(4 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES + 1 LAB) MONSOON (4 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES + 1 TUTORIAL ) MONSOON
The course covers chemistry of p block elements.
The course offers fundamentals and basics of quantum chemistry. We discuss the basic
Course Content postulates of the quantum mechanism, its foundation, and its applications to the hydrogen
Chemistry of Group 13-17 Elements of the periodic table: atom and other systems relevant to chemistry students.
Group 13: Inert pair effect, relativistic effect, the reactivity of the elements, hydrides,
Course Content
halides, oxides and hydroxides, boron Cluster, Wade’s rule.
Origin of Quantum Mechanics: Black body radiation, photoelectric effects, wave-particle
Group 14: Occurrence and extraction, applications, physical properties reactivity of the duality, de Broglic equation, Heisenberg Uncertainty relations (without proof).
elements, hydrides, carbides and silicides, halides, oxides and hydroxides, oxoacids and
silicates, siloxanes (silicones), sulfides, nitrides, aqueous solution chemistry of group 14
Postulates and General Principles of Quantum Mechanics: Basic concepts and properties of
elements.
operators, eigen functions and eigen values, linear and non-linear operators, commutation of
operators and commutator, expectation value, properties of Hermitian operators, postulates
Group 15: Occurrence and extraction, applications, physical properties, bonding, the
reactivity of the elements, hydrides, nitrides, phosphides and arsenides, halides and of quantum mechanics, Schrodinger equation, wave functions, acceptable wave functions,
oxohalides, oxides and oxoacids, phosphazenes, sulfides, and selenides. probability interpretations of the wave functions.
Group 16: Occurrence and extraction, applications, physical properties, bonding, the
Particle in a One-Dimensional Box: Setting up Schrodinger equation for particle in a one-
reactivity of the elements, hydrides, metal sulfides and polysulfides, selenides and tellurides,
halides, and oxohalides, oxides and oxoacids, compounds with nitrogen and aqueous dimensional box, solution of Schrodinger equation, energy eigen values and wave functions,
solution chemistry group 16 elements. properties of wave functions (normalization, orthogonality, probability distribution),
expectation values of x, x2, p and px2 and uncertainty principle, particle in two and three
Group 17: Occurrence and extraction, applications, physical properties, bonding, the x
dimensional boxes, degenerate energy levels, Concept of quantum tunnelling.
reactivity of the elements, hydrides, oxy acids, pseudohalogens, polyhalides, interhalogen,
iodine based reagent in organic transformation.
Quantized Vibrational Motion: Setting up of Schrödinger equation for simple harmonic
Oxidation state and redox property of group elements: periodic trends in reduction oscillator (detailed solution is not required), discussion of eigen values and wave functions,
potential.
vibrational selection rule.
Lab Schedule:
Quantized Rotational Motion: Quantization of angular momentum, rigid rotator model
S. No Experiments for diatomic molecule, Schrödinger equation, energy and wave functions (no derivation),
1 Expt.1- Redox titration with K2Cr2O7 coordinate transformation, Spherical Harmonics.
a. Estimation of Fe(II) using K2Cr2O7 solution
b. Estimation of Fe(III) and Cu(II) in a mixture using K2Cr2O7
Hydrogen Atom: Schrödinger equation in Spherical polar coordinates, radial part, radial wave
2 Expt.2- Complexometric titration: Zn(II) and Cu(II) mixture
function (no derivation), probability density, radial distribution function, quantization of
3 Expt.3- Gravimetry analysis
a. Estimation of Ni(II) using Dimethylglyoxime (DMG) energy (only final energy expression).
b. Estimation of Al(III) by precipitating with oxine and weighing as Al(oxine)3
4 Expt.4- The nature of Iodine in different solvents: extend of charge transfer
Molecular Orbital Theory: LCAO treatment of H2+, bonding and antibonding MOs,
5 Expt.5- Synthesis and characterization of tert-Butylamine: Borane, a Lewis acid-base adduct
qualitative LCAO treatment of H (detailed derivation not required), Basic concepts of HF
2
6 Expt.6- Variable oxidation states of Tin: Preparation of Tin(IV) Iodide and preparation of Tin(ll)
Iodide and DFT.
7 Expt.7- Synthesis of hexakis(4-nitrophenoxy)cyclotriphosphazene
8 Expt.8- Positive oxidation states of Iodine: Preparation of dipyridineiodine(l) nitrate Prerequisites: Chemical Principles (CHY111), Physics (PHY101/PHY103/PHY102/PHY104),
9 Expt.9- Friedel Craft reaction using AlCl3 and Mathematical methods (MAT101/ MAT103)/ Mathematics for Chemists-I (CHY103).
10 VIVA Co-requisite: Molecular Spectroscopy (CHY313).
Prerequisite: : Chemical Principles (CHY111), Basic Organic Chemistry I (CHY122) and Inorganic Chemistry I (CHY144).
34
35
CHY313: MOLECULAR SPECTROSCOPY CHY321: NAMED ORGANIC REACTIONS AND MECHANISMS
(4 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES + 1 TUTORIAL) MONSOON (2 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES) MONSOON
In this course, Rotational, Vibrational, UV-Visible, Fluorescence and NMR spectroscopy C-C bond forming reactions and their mechanism focusing on Carbanion alkylation, Carbonyl
methods will be taught. Chemists often adopt these techniques to identify the electronic addition and carbonyl substitution reactions, Conjugate addition reactions (1,2-addition
and molecular structures of chemical and biochemical systems. Students will achieve
& 1,4- addition), Reactions of alkene, alkynes and aromatics. C-N and C-O bond forming
a knowledge about the behaviour of molecular systems in presence of an external
reactions and their mechanism. Glycosylation reactions. Oxidation and reduction reactions,
electromagnetic field in different frequency ranges. The principle along with comprehensive
theories for each of the spectroscopy method will be discussed in the classes. Rearrangement reactions, Free radical reactions. Photochemical reactions and mechanism,
Norrish type I and II reactions. The above reactions will be taught under some name
Course Content
reactions. This is an advanced level course where various name reactions are taught.
This course is built on the knowledge of basic structure and bonding and various organic
Introduction: Meaning of spectroscopy and use of different spectroscopic tools to
reactions, functional group conversions that are taught in the previous organic chemistry
understand diverse applications.
courses (CHY221, CHY222). This course will equip students with enough knowledge on
various organic name reactions and their probable mechanisms to carry out multistep
Origin of spectra: Revision of electromagnetic spectrum and Energy associated with them,
organic transformations.
Electromagnetic field, Molecular energy states and spectroscopic transitions, Factors
affecting line broadening and intensity of lines, selection rules.
Course Content
Rotational Spectroscopy: Rotational spectroscopy of diatomic molecules, Degeneracy of C-C Bond forming reactions and Mechanism: Ring Closing Metathesis, Heck Reaction,
rotational levels, Effect of isotopic substitution, centrifugal distortion, Non-rigid rotator.
Negishi Reaction, Suzuki Reaction, Reformatsky reaction, Ugi reaction, Morita-Baylis-
Application of rotational spectroscopy
Hillmann Reaction.
Vibrational spectroscopy: Infrared spectroscopy, Harmonic oscillator, Anharmonic model,
vibrational-rotational spectrum, breakdown of Born-Oppenheimer Approximation, vibration C-N Bond forming reactions and Mechanism: Ullmann reaction, Buchwald and Hartwig
of polyatomic molecules, Fourier-Transform infrared spectroscopy and its advantage, reaction, Metal free C-N bond formation reactions, Fisher Peptide synthesis, Click reaction.
applications. Raman Spectroscopy, Classical theory of Raman scattering, Polarizability, Rule
of mutual exclusion.
C-O Bond forming reactions and Mechanism: Allan-Robinson reaction, Fisher Oxazole
synthesis, Ferrier reaction, Glycosidation reaction, Sharpless asymmetric Epoxidation.
UV-Vis spectroscopy: Theory of UV-Vis/electronic spectroscopy: Lambert-Beer’s Law,
Oxidation, Reduction reactions and Mechanism: Bayer-Villeger oxidation, Dess-Martin
Woodward-Fieser Rules, Molecular potential energy, Molecular term symbol, Selection rules
and electronic transition, Chemical analysis by electronic spectroscopy. periodinane oxidation, Swern Oxidation, Corey–Kim oxidation, Luche reduction, Birch
reduction, Gribble reduction.
Fluorescence spectroscopy: Introduction to fluorescence spectroscopy: Jablonski diagram,
Radiative and non-radiative rates, Frank-Condon principle, Stokes shift, solvent relaxation,
Rearrangement Reactions and Mechanism: Benzilbenzilic acid rearrangement, Pinacol
solvatochromism, excimer and exciplex formation, quantum yield & life-time. Spin-orbit
Pinacolone rearrangement, Fries rearrangement, Amadori rearrangement, Demzanov
coupling.
rearrangement, Payne rearrangement, Wallach rearrangement, Ferrier rearrangement.
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR): Theory of NMR, Spinning nucleus, effect of an
external magnetic field, precessional motion and Larmor frequency, temperature effect, Conjugate addition reactions and Mechanism: Prins reaction.
Boltzman distribution, origin of chemical shift and its implication in magnetic field strength,
anisotropic effect, proton NMR spectrum, carbon NMR, concept of multi-dimensional NMR,
Photochemical reactions and Mechanism: Norish type I reaction, Norish type II reaction.
influence of restricted rotation, fluxional molecules, conformational dynamics, solvent shift,
concentration and temperature effect, hydrogen bonding, theory of spin-spin splitting and
coupling constants, factors influencing the coupling constant, geminal coupling, vicinal Prerequisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-II (CHY221).
coupling, heteronuclear coupling, deuterium exchange. Rotating frame of reference, Spin-
spin and spin-lattice relaxation. Pulse NMR technique.
Prerequisites: Chemical Principles (CHY111) and Physical Methods in Chemistry (CHY214).
36
37
CHY322: HETEROCYCLIC CHEMISTRY CHY323: ORGANOMETALLIC CHEMISTRY
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) SPRING (3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) MONSOON
Heterocyclic chemistry will be discussing organic chemistry regarding the synthesis, This course includes the concept of organometallic chemistry (definition) and how
properties, and applications of these heterocycles. These cyclic compounds with the ring organometallic chemistry is different from coordination chemistry. In first half we will
containing carbon and other element, the component being oxygen, nitrogen and sulfur. Also
cover origin of organometallic chemistry, 18 electron rules, CO, NO, PR , alkene, alkyne,
heterocyclic compounds as natural products will be discussed and to advance the knowledge 3
carbene, benzene, H , O and N2 as ligand. In second half we will cover some example of
of heterocyclic structures. 2 2
organometallic catalyst, ferrocene chemistry, organometallic chemistry of p-block elements
Course Content and reaction mechanism etc.
Introduction: Definition of terms and classification of heterocycles, Functional group Course Content
chemistry (imines, enamines, acetals, enols, and sulfur-containing groups ), Synthesis of
Introduction of organometallic chemistry: History of organometallic chemistry;
pyridines
Fundamentals of coordination and organometallic chemistry in terms of MO approach; 18
electron rules and its violation; M-M bonding.
Intermediates used for the construction of aromatic heterocycles: Synthesis of aromatic
heterocycles, Examples of commonly used strategies for heterocycle synthesis, Carbon–
heteroatom bond formation and choice of oxidation state Metal carbonyl chemistry: Bonding modes (IR stretching frequency); Reactions of metal
carbonyls (activation, nucleophilic addition); Metal Carbonyl vs. metal nitrosyls vs. metal
Pyridines: General properties, electronic structure, electrophilic and nucleophilic
cyanidies; Linear nitrosyl vs. bent nitrosyls.
substitution of pyridines, metallation of pyridines.
Phosphine as spectator ligands: Tolman con angle vs. basicity (IR stretching frequency)
Pyridine derivatives: Structure and reactivity of oxy-pyridines, alkyl pyridines, pyridinium
Alkene and alkyne as ligand: Structure and bonding of Zesis salt, Bonding in terms of
salts, and pyridine N-oxides
molecular orbital.
Quinolines and isoquinolines: General properties and reactivity compared to pyridine,
Electrophilic and nucleophilic substitution quinolines and isoquinolines, general methods Carbene chemistry: Fisher vs. Schrock carbene, stability and reactivity of singlet and triplet
used for the synthesis of quinolines and isoquinolines.
carbene (e.g. Li2C vs H2C vs F2C etc.); Synthesis and application; N-heterocyclic carbene,
carbene vs. carbine (introductory level); Zero-electron ligand, delta bonding.
Five-membered aromatic heterocycles: General properties, structure and reactivity of
pyrroles, furans and thiophenes, methods and strategies for the synthesis of five-membered
heteroaromatics, electrophilic substitution reactions of pyrroles, furans and thiophenes, Alkyl, aryl and ligands with higher heptacity: Heptacity; MO approach; Cyclic and acyclic
strategies for accomplishing regiocontrol during electrophilic substitution, Metallation of polyenyl pi-bonded ligands; Sandwich compounds; Chemistry of Cp*; Basic chemical
five-membered heteroaromatics and use the of directing groups reactions of ferrocene; 1,3-butadiene, cyclobutadiene, cycloheptatriene, cyclooctatetraene
and benzene as ligand.
Indoles: Comparison of electronic structure and reactivity of indoles to that of pyrroles,
Fisher and Bischler indole syntheses, reactions of indoles with electrophiles, Mannich
Reaction mechanism: Oxidative addition, Reductive elimination, Migration, Insertion, beta H
reaction of indoles to give 3-substituted indoles (gramines), modification of Mannich
products to give various 3-substituted indoles, synthetic strategies to access natural elimination; Trans effect vs. Trans influence: mechanistic approach
products and pharmaceutical drugs based on indoles
C-H activation: Introduction, C-H functionalization vs. C-H activation; Importance;
Azoles (1,2 and 1,3-): Structure and reactivity of 1,2- and 1,3-azoles, synthesis and reactions
Classification; Organometallic C-H activation vs. biological C-H activation; Present research
of imidazoles, oxazoles and thiazoles, Synthesis and reactions of pyrazoles, isoxazoles and
status.
isothiazoles.
Synthetic Applications of Complexes Containing Metal-Carbon Sigma-Bonds:
Student presentation: Topic will be suggested by the instructor.
• Homogeneous catalysis by soluble transition metal complexes: Hydroformylation;
Prerequisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-II (CHY221) and Named Reactions and Mechanisms
Hydrogenation; Olefin Metathesis; Olefin polymerization, detailed kinetic and
(CHY321).
mechanistic study.
38
39
CHY351: MACROMOLECULES
• Catalysis: Heterogeneous catalysis; Terminology in catalysis, Application of chiral phosphine
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) MONSOON
ligand in catalysis.
• Organometallic chemistry of p-block elements.
The course is designed to assist a transition of the knowledge acquired by students during
school level to university level. In this course we will learn about cellular macromolecules
Prerequisites: Coordination Chemistry (CHY242).
such as carbohydrates, nucleic acids, and proteins. The chemistry and biochemistry associated
with these macromolecules will be discussed with examples. The goal is to learn about these
important natural macro molecules, not only from a structural but from an atomic point of
view as well. We will talk about the chemistry associated with these molecules including
CHY342: CHEMISTRY OF SOLIDS AND SURFACES nomenclature, stereochemistry, associated chemical reactions and their importance. Classes
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) SPRING will be through a combination of lectures, presentations and assignments.
In this course, the students will get to know the chemistry behind the formation of solids and on
Course Content
their surfaces, the kind of bonding involved and the available techniques to characterize them.
Introduction of Macromolecules
Through this course students will also learn how to interpret various chemical structures of
Carbohydrates: Introduction, function and importance in chemistry and biology, class of
solids and their surfaces. Students will further understand crystallographic terminology, selected
diffraction theory, nomenclature at surfaces, reconstruction and relaxations at surfaces and how carbohydrates monosaccharides (definitions and functions, Nomenclature, Fischer Projections
to determine the surface structure. They will also realize the wide range of chemical information and D/L notation, Open chain and cyclic structure of pentose, hexose sugars, determination
available from diffraction-based techniques. Further the students will learn about different surface of configuration/ absolute, mutarotation, ascending and descending in monosaccharides,
phenomena such as adsorption, catalysis, work function, and basics of the electronic, magnetic,
chemical reactions of monosaccharides), Oligosaccharides (examples and functions),
and optical properties, and their relevance to nanomaterials.
Polysaccharides (Homo and hetero polysaccharides, examples and their functions (Starch,
Glycogen, Dextran, Cellulose, Chitin, Agar Galactosan, Hyaluronic acid).
Course Content
Introduction to Solid State Chemistry: Classification of solids based on different binding forces:
Glycoconjugates: Proteoglycans, Glycoproteins, Structural and Functions of glycoproteins
molecular, ionic, covalent and metallic solids, amorphous and crystalline solids.
Nucleic Acids (DNA and RNA): Introduction of nucleic acids, classes of nucleic acids, building-
blocks Purine and Pyrimidine bases, sugars and phosphates, structures, examples and
Crystal Chemistry: Introduction to crystal Cchemistry, unit cells and crystal systems, Bravais
lattices and lattice spacing, planes, Miller indices, reciprocal lattices, crystal densities and packing functions of nucleosides & nucleotides, structures of polynucleotides, forces for stabilities of
efficiency, crystallographic notations, Symmetry: point group and space group. base-pairing, discovery of DNA and structure of DNA, Watson and Crick’s Model, minor and
major grooves in DNA, types (A, B and Z-DNA and their biological relevance).
Bonding in Solids: Overview on Bonding, Ionic, Covalent, Metallic, van der Waals and Hydrogen
Bonding, Intermolecular Forces, Lattice Energy.
Amino acids, peptide and proteins: Amino Acids (name, structures, three letter code, one
letter code), Common features of amino acids (AA), Number of carbons in amino acids,
Crystalline Materials: Properties of X-Rays, X-Ray Diffraction Techniques, Point & Line Defects,
classification (D, L) and configurations of amino acids, classification of AA side chains by
Line, Interface & Bulk Defects
chemical properties (Polar, non-polar, ionic amino acids), acid base properties of amino acids
(pKa calculations),Ionization of AAs (Zwitter ion, isoelectric point and electrophoresis), Peptide,
Solid State Properties: Optical properties, Electrical properties, Thermal properties.
oligopeptides structures and proteins, reaction of amino acids N terminus and C terminus
Ester of carboxylic group, acetylation of amino group, Complexation with Cu2+ ions, Ninhydrin
Introduction to the Chemistry of Surfaces: Surface structure (Nomenclature, Surface unit cell,
test, Post translational modifications (phosphorylation, glycosylation etc.), preparation of
Relaxation and reconstruction at surfaces and its relevance to nanomaterials, How to characterize
amino acids, Strecker synthesis, Gabriel phthalimide synthesis.
atomic structure at surfaces), Basics of different phenomena at surfaces (Surface energy, Electronic
structure, 2D Brillouin zone, photoemission, Work function, Magnetic properties and relevance to
nanomaterials, Optical properties, Adsorption and catalysis, Two dimensional structures. Protein Structure and quick overview of primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary
structure, structure determination of peptides. Synthesis of simple dipeptides by N-protection
Prerequisites: Chemical Principles (CHY111) and Physical Methods in Chemistry (CHY214) or (t-butoxycarbonyl and phthaloyl), C-activating group and Merrifield solid phase synthesis.
Physics (PHY101/102/103/104).
Prerequisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-II (CHY221).
40
41
CHY226: FUNDAMENTALS OF PROTEIN CHEMISTRY
IN-DEPTH COURSES FOR
(4 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES + 1 TUTORIAL ) SPRING
SPECIALIZATIONS
The course provides an in-depth study of protein structure and function. Building up from an
understanding of amino acids and the peptide bond that form the basics of protein structure,
protein folding and denaturation will be studied followed by the techniques used for protein
CHY216: MODELLING CHEMICAL REACTIONS
isolation and characterization. The importance of metalloproteins and motor proteins will be
(3 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES + 2 HOUR LAB) SPRING
followed by a discussion on membrane proteins and transport.
The course is organised in three parts. The first part will provide an overview of the computational
Course Content
models and techniques to understand the fundamental concepts of chemical reactions. In this
Amino acids and the peptide Bond: Amino Acids, Chirality, Polar/ Non-Polar, Hydrophobicity
part, the students will get a general picture of terms and principles necessary to model chemical
index, Peptide Bond Formation, Planarity, Rigidity.
reactions. The second parts will cover the principles and hand-on experience with energy surfaces
of heterogeneous reactions related to chemistry of materials. In the third part, we discuss the
modelling of chemical reaction involving biomolecular system. The course highlights the modelling Protein architecture: Primary, Secondary, Tertiary, Quaternary structure overview, Torsion
of reaction pathways in several catalysts and it also discusses the thermodynamic and kinetic angles, Mass to charge ratio, Amino Acid Sequencing overview, Domains, Non-covalent
modelling approaches for several chemical reactions. Towards the end of this part, concepts of interactions, Super-twisted, Coiled-Coil structures, helical wheel.
the electronic factors and surface orbital interactions to understand the activity of the chemical
reactions will also be introduced. Protein folding and denaturation: Molecular Chaperone, Folding models, Conformational
Entropy, Stabilizing Interactions, Denaturants.
Course Content
Protein isolation and characterization: Protein purification, Salting in and salting out,
Modelling in chemical reactions (General): IModelling potential energy diagrams using Centrifugation, Sedimentation, chromatography, Dialysis, Protein Chromophores, Fluorophore,
computation; Transition state theory; Time scale problems in simulations, kinetic modelling of SDS-PAGE, Isoelectric focusing, Microscopy.
reaction pathways and applications; Quantum and thermal corrections to reaction energies in
computation; Concepts of bands and orbital interactions; Chemical equilibrium in gases, solids and
Protein-ligand interactions: Binding sites, Co-factor, Allosteric, Immune response, Binding
solution; Modelling free energy diagrams of reactions.
affinity, Dissociation constant, Cooperativity, Binding curve.
Modelling chemical reactions in materials: Surface reactions; adsorption and desorption of
Protein-protein, protein-carbohydrate, protein-nucleic acid interactions: Protein-protein
chemical intermediates, Adsorption equilibrium, adsorption entropy (configurational entropy);
interactions and examples, Types of protein-protein interfaces, Properties of interfaces,
Kinetics of surface reactions: scaling relations of chemisorption energies; Electrified solid-
Binding affinity, Importance of Protein-Carbohydrate interactions, Proteoglycans,
electrolyte interface; Electron transfer processes; Computational hydrogen electrode; concept of
Glycoproteins, Glycosphingolipids, Lectins, Importance of Protein - Nucleic acid interactions,
overpotential in electrochemical reactions; modelling potential energy diagrams in electrocatalysis;
Types of interactions, Specific and non-specific interactions.
Electronic factors in Heterogeneous catalysis: Orbital interactions in solid surfaces. Chemisorption
energy and molecule-surface interactions, frontier orbital perspective, d-band model of tracing
Membrane proteins and transport: Lipid bilayer, Membrane lipids distribution, Types of
chemisorption energies on transition metal surfaces. Case study of Co on Ni surface.
Membrane Proteins, Membrane structure, Types of transport proteins, Membrane potential,
Passive and active transport.
Modelling chemical reactions in biomolecules: Enzyme-Substrate Complex ( Michaelis Complex);
Evaluating Activation Energy using Computational approaches; Linus Pauling’s Theory of Enzyme
Motor proteins and metalloproteins: Cytoskeleton filaments motor proteins, Mechanism of
Catalysis (GSD Theory); Warshel’s Theory of Enzyme Catalysis (TSS Theory); Empirical Valence
binding, Nucleic acids motor proteins, Rotary motor proteins, Metal ions and their mode of
Bond Theory of Enzyme Catalysis; Role of Solvent reorganisation in Enzyme Catalysis; Biomolecular
interaction with proteins, Iron-sulfur proteins, Catalase and Peroxidase, Nitrogenase, Ferritin,
Electron Tunnelling; Marcus Semi-empirical Theory of Electron transfer; Modelling rate of reaction;
Myoglobin and Hemoglobin.
Methods to calculate the rate constants using computational tools; Instanton Theory; Hybrid QM/
MM methods to model enzymatic reactions.
Prerequisites: : Introduction to Chemical Biology (CHY223), Basic Organic Chemistry-II
Prerequisites: Molecular Modelling (CHY114), Chemical Equilibrium (CHY211), Chemical Binding/
(CHY221).
Quantum Chemistry (CHY 311).
42
43
ELECTIVES
CHY346: CHARACTERIZATION AND ANALYSIS OF MATERIALS
CHY315: COMPUTING FOR CHEMISTRY WITH PYTHON (3 CREDITS: 1
(3 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES+ 2 HOUR LAB) SPRING
LECTURES + 2 LAB, EACH 2 HOUR) MONSOON
The course gives an introduction to the basic programing skills in python and numerical methods
This is an advanced level course discussing about working principle of various materials
useful for solving chemistry problems. The course is meant for the students in third year of
characterization techniques (XRD, XPS, TEM, SEM, etc.) along with hands-on experience of
B.Sc, first year of M.Sc program and first year of Ph.D. program. No prior experience in python
nanomaterials synthesis and its characterization.
programing will be needed at the start of course. However, basic knowledge of chemistry and
mathematics will be needed. Over the duration of the course, the students will get a glimpse of
Course Content
utilizing the python coding for solving numerical chemistry problems, reading and writing files,
Basics of materials characterization techniques: EPR, Mossbauer, AFM, STEM, SEM, TEM, plotting graphs and handling common errors in python coding. Towards the end of the course,
DLS, XPS, UPS, SERS, SECM, Piezoelectric, Ferroelectric measurements, PXRD, Scattering
a hands-on experience of using the different python libraries and modules will be given to be
(XRAY, SAXS, SANS), BET surface analysis, thermal characterization (TGA, DSC), bandgap
used for visualizing molecular structures and periodic lattices from different quantum chemistry
calculation.
simulation packages and analysing the atomistic simulations data.
Course Content
Lab Schedules Basic Python: Basic Math symbols: Python Mathematical operators, basic mathematics, and
advanced mathematical calculations; Integers & Floats, Python Functions; Variables: Assigning
1. Ultrasonic-Assisted Synthesis, Characterization, and
and choosing variables;nStrings: Creating a string, indexing a string, string methods, and string
Application of a Metal−Organic Framework: Green
formatting; Boolean logic: Boolean basics, compound comparisons, truth representations, test
Synthesis.
for inclusions.
2. Facile Synthesis of a Cu(II) coordination complex and
Logical tools and read/write functions: Conditions: if and else statements; Lists and Tuples:
its characterization by EPR technique.
creating lists, indexing, and slicing, List methods, and range objects; Loops: for loops, while loops,
continue, pass & break commands; File Input and Output (I/O): reading and writing lines with
3. Simple Syntheses of CdSe Quantum Dots.
python.
4. Controlled Synthesis of Cu(OH) and CuO Nanowires.
2 Functions and error handling: Creating Functions: Basic functions, return statements, docstrings;
Materials preparation,
Dictionaries, Python modules, Zipping; Error Handling: Types of errors (Name Error, Syntax Error,
characterization and analysis 5. Facile synthesis of Polyoxalometallates and Single
Type Error, Value Error, Index Error, Key Error, Indentation Error, Zero Division Error, Deprecation
Crystal XRD analysis.
Warning), workout around errors with try and except.
6. Conducting polymer (PANI) synthesis and it redox
In-built Python modules: Plotting with Matplotlib: Plotting basics, Markers and colour, Labels,
behavior studies.
Figure size, saving figures, plotting types, 3D plots, Surface plots; Working with NumPy module,
Pandas Module.
7. Synthesis of Au or Ag nanoparticles synthesis and
analysis.
Applications of Python for chemistry problems: Mathematics: Symbolic mathematics, symbols,
Algebra and polynomials, solving equations, matrices, mathematical operations with arrays, Least
8. Micelle preparation and visualization using LB, AFM.
square minimizations, Balancing chemical equations, Eigenvalues and Eigenvectors; Optimization
of mathematical functions and root findings: minimizations and maximizations, fitting equations
Prerequisites: Introduction to Materials Chemistry (CHY243).
to data, root finding;Applications to chemistry: random number generation, solving system of
equations in chemical kinetics, Curve fitting, Use of python modules like Atomistic simulation
environment and pymatgen for visualization of atoms and molecular structure.
Prerequisites: Mathematics for chemist-I (CHY103)/ Mathematics for chemist-II (CHY104),
Chemical Binding/Quantum Chemistry (CHY 311).
44
45
CHY324: ORGANIC FUNCTIONAL MATERIALS CHY326: STEREOELECTRONIC EFFECTS IN ORGANIC CHEMISTRY
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES ) SPRING (3 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES + 1 TUTORIAL) SPRING
The course focuses on the organic functional materials for the material chemistry To design new organic materials, it is absolutely essential to have detailed understanding of
specialization in the undergraduate level. It starts with general introductions and principles the structure, energies and reactivities of the newly design molecules and stereoelectronic
of the self-assembly process and proceeds to the advanced organic materials such as soft effects play crucial role to determine these factors. A comprehensive overview of classical
materials, liquid crystalline materials, semiconductors, and then ends up with an overview of as well as modern stereochemical models and their application will be presented during this
organic solar cells. course. A multidimensional approach will be discussed for deeper understanding of this effect.
Primary aim of this course is to answer how stereoelectronic effect is applicable to organic
Course Content chemistry for broader and deeper understanding of inherent reactivities and properties of
Introduction: Overview of the non-covalent forces, Principles of self-assembly process, organic molecules. Major attention will be paid to make a bridge between the classical and
thermodynamics and kinetic considerations, structural and thermodynamic origin of modern stereoelectronic models to explain the stereochemical outcome of organic reactions.
molecular recognition processes leading to self-assembly.
Course Content
Aggregation: Self-assembly models (isodesmic, cooperative, anticooperative), Introduction: Historical perspectives and recent application stereoelectronic effect.
Photochemistry of the self-assembled systems and chromophores, Exciton coupling theory
(Kasha Model), Optical spectroscopy (UV-Vis, CD). Role of orbital interaction on reactivity: bond formation without bond breaking and bond
formation with bond breaking.
Stimuli-responsive materials: Molecular switches, Azobenzene, dithienylethene, spiropyran
and hydrazone-based switches, functional materials which respond to external stimuli (pH, Factors controlling effective orbital overlap: hybridization, orbital size, distortions, steric
light, etc), Mechanoresponsive materials. effects, directionality, ionic character and charge distribution, electronic counts, isovalent vs
sacrificial conjugation and hyperconjugation.
Smart Materials: Self-healing materials, self-resistant materials, superhydrophobic materials.
Soft materials: Supramolecular polymers, Gels, Micelles, Vesicles, reverse micelles, Stereoelectronics of supramolecular interactions: FMO interactions in the intramolecular
properties, and applications. complex and H-bonding in enzymes and supramolecular interactions with π systems.
Combined computational and experimental approach to study stereoelectronic effect:
Liquid crystals: Definition and historical perspective of liquid crystals; mesogens and General trends of donors and acceptors: antiperiplanarity & polarization, hybridization &
mesophases; thermotropic and lyotropic liquid crystals; applications in liquid crystal displays. orbital energy effect.
Luminescent molecular solids: Solid state arrangements (classification, polymorphism), From orbital interaction to conformational analysis: alkanes, carbonyls & ester and related
spectral shifts, radiative decay in molecular excitons, excitons vs. excimers, solid state carbonyls, amides, vinyl ether and enamines,
luminescence enhancement, non-radiative deactivation, exciton trapping & sensitization,
luminescent solid state systems. Remote stereoelectronic effect: homoconjugation, homoanomeric effect, cross
hyperconjugation, through space interaction, symmetry and co-operative effect.
Organic semiconductors: Band vs hopping transport, Fermi level, small molecules and
polymers, excitons, conductivity measurements, charge carrier mobility determination, Application of stereoelectronic effects in reaction design: application of static and dynamic
organic semiconductor materials, polyacetylene, MEH-PPV, P3HT, PEDOT, PANI, acenes, stereoelectronic effects, catalyst design, in enzyme catalyzed reaction in bioorganic chemistry.
copper phthalocyanine, PTCDA and perylene bisimides, triarylamines, oligothiophenes,
OFETs, OLEDs.
Probing stereoelectronic effects with spectroscopic methods: Bohlmann effect,
intramolecular vesion of Bohlmann effect, diamagnetic effect, anomeric effect, paramagnetic
Organic photovoltaics: Principles of photovoltaic energy conversion, Types of photovoltics effect, Perlin effects, reverse Perlin effects, through-space interactions, and umpolung effect-
Cells, Organic photovoltaic cells, Dye Sensitized Solar Cells (DSSC), Organic Bulk Hetero NMR consequences of positive hyperconjugation.
Junction Solar Cells (BHJ-SC), design considerations, important examples.
Prerequisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-II (CHY221) and Chemistry of Carbonyl Compounds
Prerequisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-II (CHY221), Characterization and Analysis of Chemistry (CHY222).
Materials (CHY246).
46
47
CHY332: INFORMATICS & MACHINE LEARNING CHY346: NANOSTRUCTURED INORGANIC MATERIALS AND APPLICATIONS
(3 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES + 3 H COMPUTER LAB) SPRING (3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) SPRING
This course and the associated computer lab deal with Molecular Modelling and Cheminformatics, This course will examine the science of nanotechnology and place it in the larger social context
applied to the search for new drugs or materials with specific properties or specific physiological of how this technology may be, and already is, applied. Underlying physical science principles
effects (in silico Drug Discovery). Students will learn the general principles of structure-activity will be covered in lecture sessions and students will read articles from current news sources
relationship modelling, docking & scoring, homology modelling, statistical learning methods and and the scientific literature. There will be lectures and discussions on scientific literature on
advanced data analysis. They will gain familiarity with software for structure-based and ligand- topics of student interests, to examine the science and applications of a well-defined aspect
based drug discovery. Some coding and scripting will be required. of nanotechnology. Lectures will be focused on the principles behind utility of designed
nanostructures for many applications.
Course Content
Introduction: Drug Discovery in the Information-rich age, Introduction to Pattern recognition and
Machine Learning, Supervised and unsupervised learning paradigms and examples, Applications Course Content
potential of Machine learning in Chem- & Bioinformatics, Introduction to Classification and Basics of Inorganic functional materials: Introduction, Bulk vs. Nano, Different types of
Regression methods. nanomaterials: 0D, 1D, and 2D, Quantum confinement effect, Surface area to volume ratio,
Effect on Properties: Material (electrical, magnetic, mechanical, optical, etc.) and structural
Representation of Chemical Structure and Similarity: Sequence Descriptors, Text mining, properties.
Representations of 2D Molecular Structures: SMILES, Chemical File Formats, 3D Structure,
Descriptors and Molecular Fingerprints, Graph Theory and Topological Indices, Progressive Nanostructure materials: Carbon nano-architectures: Fullerene, SWNT, MWNT, Graphene,
incorporation of chemically relevant information into molecular graphs, Substructural Descriptors, nanodiamonds; Nanostructures of silicon and other materials such as germanene,
Physicochemical Descriptors, Descriptors from Biological Assays, Representation and phosphorene, MoS2, borophene and their properties; Q-Dots, nanoparticles of metals and
characterization of 3D Molecular Structures, Pharmacophores, Molecular Interaction Field Based semiconductors, self-assembly, molecular electronics, nanowires; Nanomaterial’s synthesis:
Models, Local Molecular Surface Property Descriptors, Quantum Chemical Descriptors, Shape Top down and Bottom up approaches, Physical and chemical methods, Applications (Nano-
Descriptors, Protein Shape Comparisons, Motif Models, Molecular Similarity Measures, Chemical machines, solar cells, coatings, MEMS, nano-medicine, sensors, magnetic storage devices,
Space and Network graphs, Semantic technologies and Linked Data. miscellaneous).
Mapping Structure to Response: Predictive Modeling which includes Linear Free Energy Fundamental concepts of electrochemistry in energy systems: Electrochemical Cell, Faraday’s
Relationships, Quantitative Structure-Activity/Property Relationships (QSAR/QSPR) Modeling, laws, Electrode Potentials, Thermodynamic energy and electrochemical potential, Mode of
Ligand-Based and Structure-Based Virtual High Throughput Screening, 3D Methods - electrochemical processes, Different electrochemical techniques (CV, LSV, DPV, etc.).
Pharmacophore Modeling and alignment, ADMET Models, Activity Cliffs, Structure Based
Methods, docking and scoring, Model Domain of Applicability.
Materials for various applications: Sensors and actuators, Nanomachines, Magnetic materials,
Data Mining and Statistical Methods which includes Linear and Non-Linear Models, Data
Photonic materials, Superconductivity, Thermoelectric materials, Perovskites, Metal clusters,
preprocessing and performance measures in Classification & Regression, Feature selection,
Piezoelectricity and active materials.
Principal Component analysis, Partial Least-Squares Regression, kNN, Classification trees and
Random forests, Cluster and Diversity analysis, Introduction to kernel methods, Support vector
Prerequisites: : Chemistry of Solids and Surfaces (CHY342), Characterization and Analysis of
machines classification and regression, Introduction to Neural Nets, Self-Organized Maps, Deep
Materials (CHY246).
Neural Networks, Introduction to evolutionary computing, Deep Learning and Convolutional
Neural Nets, Genetic Algorithms, Data Fusion, Model Validation, Best Practices in Predictive
Cheminformatics.
Prerequisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-I (CHY122), Basic Statistics (MAT284/MAT084),
Programming (CHY114/ BIO101/MAT110/PHY105/CSD101)
48
49
CHY 348: BIO-INORGANIC CHEMISTRY
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) SPRING 14. Se containing enzyme (e.g. Glutathione peroxidase).
Prerequisites: Coordination Chemistry (CHY242), Organometallic and Bio-inorganic Chemistry (323)
This course includes origin of bioinorganic chemistry, uses of metal ions in life, analytical
techniques involved to determine reactive intermediates and to predict mode of action, reaction
CHY352: ADVANCED BIOCHEMISTRY (3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) SPRING
mechanism and bio-mimetic catalyst designing.
Course Content The course is designed to explain the biochemical reactions by the knowledge of chemistry. The
1. General discussion about bioinorganic chemistry. transition of the knowledge acquired in chemistry will be nurtured to understand the functions
of biomacromolecules such as nucleic acids, proteins, carbohydrates and lipids. In addition, how
2. Biological important elements, Biological ligands. these biochemical reactions occur by help of the vitamins, enzymes and hormones in different
subcellular organelles. We will also learn the chemistry and biochemistry associated with these
3. Alkali and alkaline earth metal in biology: Role of Na, K (Na-K pump, chelate chemistry, SHAB biomacromolecules with examples. The goal is to learn the importance of the chemistry associated
theory); Mg (ATP hydrolysis and chlorophyll) and Ca. to these biomolecules including carbohydrate metabolism, Protein Sequencing, DNA Sequencing,
DNA chemistry, Gene Sequencing, Co-factors, Co-enzymes. Classes will be through a combination
4. Zn(II) as nature’s lewis acid: Hydrolase enzyme, Zn containing hydrolase enzyme e.g. Carbonic of lectures, presentations and assignments.
anhydrases (CA), therapeutic application of CA inhibitors; carboxypeptidase and its classification.
Course Content
5.Importance of Oxygen, Great oxygenation event. General Introduction on Biomolecules: Carbohydrates, Proteins, Nucleic Acids, Lipids, Enzymes
and Vitamins (in brief)
6. Iron based chemistry in nature; Iron metabolism: Iron transport, Iron storage; Iron cycle.
Carbohydrates: Structure and Functions, metabolism, Kreb’s Cycle and Glycolysis.
7. Oxygen utilization: (i) Oxygen transport and storage (Hemoglobin vs. Myoglobin) (ii) Oxidases Proteins: Properties, Structure and Functions, Protein Sequencing, why does sequence matter?
enzyme: Cytochrome c oxidase, Electron transport chain, Cytochrome c oxidase vs. Cytochrome Protein sequencing from scratch, End group analysis, Cyanogen bromide method, Sanger’s method,
in respiratory cycle; electron transfer reaction in biology; (iii) Oxygenase: Cyt P450: Reaction and Dansyl chloride method, Edman degradation , De novo peptide sequencing, Sequence by Mass
mechanism; (iv) Peroxidase: HRP; (v) Importance of metal-oxo species, role of axial ligand for Spectrometry (MALDI, ESI-MS, Tandem MS).
stabilizing metal-oxo species and controlling the reactivity, effect of electronics on the reactivity of
oxo intermediate, oxo wall theory; (vi) Bio-mimetic catalyst designing. Nucleic Acids: Introduction of Nucleic acids, Gene expression, Genetic Code, Translation (DNA-
Protein), How peptides are synthesized? Chemical reactions involved in peptide synthesis, DNA
8. Organophosphate compounds, Nerve reagent, role of Zinc in phosphate hydrolysis, alkaline Sequencing, Sanger dideoxy method for sequencing, Maxam Gilbert method, DNA chemistry, DNA
phosphatase and acid phosphatase enzyme, model compound for nerve reagents destruction. damage, Methylation and demethylation, Oxidative DNA damage, DNA-DNA crosslinks, DNA-
Protein crosslinks, Mutagenesis, Diseases and carcinogenesis, PCR, RT-PCR techniques, DNA
9. Fe-S protein and its role, Hydrogenase enzyme, role of π-acid ligand. Finger printing (Agarose gel electrophoresis), Application of PCR such as Forensics, Relationships,
Medical Diagnostics
10. Cu containing protein and enzyme: Hemocyanin (spectroscopic characterization of oxygenated
hemocyanin), Blue Cu protein, Superoxide dismutase (role of Cu and Zn in SOD).
Lipids: Fats (properties and functions), Fatty Acids, Classes of Lipids, Nomenclature of fatty acids
Examples of diff. Lipids, Phospholipids, Steroids, Beta Oxidation mechanism
11. Importance of Mn in nature: Why nature use manganese in photosynthesis? Importance of
Enzymes: Co-factors, Co-enzymes, Apo-enzyme, Halo enzymes, Factors effecting Enzymes
water oxidation in photosynthesis, O-H bond activation, solar energy conversion; Mn containing
(Con., pH, T), Nomenclature, Mechanism of Enzymes, Biosynthesis of cofactors, NAD+-NADPH,
SOD.
Biosynthesis of Niacin (Vitamin B3), FAD-FADH-FADH2, Thiamine pyrophosphate TPP, Enzyme
assay in Diagnostic Medicine
12. Mo-containing enzyme: Nitrogenase, nitrogen cycle.
Hormones and Vitamins: Classifications, Examples and Functions
13. V (e.g. Haloperoxidase), Co (e.g. Vitamin B12), Ni (e.g. Urease, Ni containing SOD) containing
enzymes/ bio-molecules.
Prerequisites: Macromolecules (CHY351) or Biochemistry (BIO204) or Cell Biology and Genetics
50 (BIO201)
51
CHY 356: POLYMERS CHY409: STRATEGIES FOR PROBLEM SOLVING
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) MONSOON (3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES ) MONSOON
The chemistry of polymers, their synthesis and characterization will form the subject matter of The course focuses on the problem-solving strategies for inorganic, organic and physical
this advanced course, which will follow a case-study approach. Students will be expected to apply chemistry taught in the undergraduate as well as postgraduate level. In this course,
their knowledge to a real- world problem of their choice. How do changing demands in society lead strategies for solving chemical problems will be taught through lecture, tutorial and home
to polymer invention? How are monomers bonded in nature to form our body’s building blocks? assignments. The courses will provide a journey of various aspects of chemistry and utilize
How do scientists mimic nature in labs? How does the several-fold change in molecular weight them on how to approach and answer several problems on organic, inorganic and physical
from monomer to polymer result in different sets of properties? Most of the polymeric materials chemistry syllabuses. This course will also cover problem solving strategy in nanoscience and
around us are synthesized in different ways, depending upon end usage. This course will help to technology, bioorganic chemistry including carbohydrates, proteins, nucleic acids, catalysis
understand the need and importance of polymers in today’s world. Interesting chemical aspects of and supramolecular chemistry. This course will offer students techniques to solve problems
synthesis of polymeric architectures from small molecules will be explored. related to organic, inorganic and physical chemistry for the competitive examinations at the
masters and PhD entrance examinations, nationwide. It will help students to get motivated
Introduction: Nomenclature, Classification, Molecular weight, Physical state, Applications in national exam and develop skills in academia. Furthermore, this course will be an excellent
steppingstone into their higher education.
Step Growth Polymerization: Polyamide, Polyesters, Polycarbonates, Phenolic polymers, Epoxy
Course Content
resins, Polyethers, Polyurea, Polyurethanes, Carothers’s equation, End group analysis, functional
group determination Organic Chemistry: IUPAC nomenclature, aromaticity, principles of stereochemistry, organic
reactive mechanisms and intermediates, organic reagents, and synthesis including asymmetric
synthesis, named reactions, pericyclic reactions, and structure determination of unknown
Chain Growth Polymerization: Free Radical polymerization: Initiators, Inhibitors and retarders,
organic compounds using spectroscopy and spectrometry techniques. It will also cover
Mechanism, Kinetics and Thermodynamics, Polymerization processes (Bulk, Solution, Suspension,
chemistry in nanoscience and technology, bioorganic chemistry including carbohydrates,
Emulsion), Copolymers Ionic polymerization: Cationic and Anionic Polymerization: Mechanism,
proteins, nucleic acids, catalysis and, supramolecular chemistry.
Ring Opening Polymerization (ROP) Controlled/Living polymerizations: ATRP (Atom Transfer
Radical Polymerization), RAFT (Reversible Addition Fragmentation Chain Transfer), GTP (Group
Transfer Polymerization), Ziegler Natta Polymerization, Metathesis Specialty Polymers: Conducting Inorganic Chemistry: Chemical periodicity, VSEPR theory, coordination compounds, acids and
Polymers, Liquid Crystal Polymers, Organometallic Polymers, Green Polymers and their bases, main group elements and their compounds, transition elements and CFT, organometallic
applications compounds, metal cluster Bioinorganic chemistry, analytical chemistry, and nuclear Chemistry.
Polymer Characterization (Molecular weight determination): Number average molar mass, Physical Chemistry: Basic principles of quantum mechanics, atomic structure chemical
bonding, molecular spectroscopy, applications of group theory, thermodynamics,
End group assay, Colligative Properties of Solutions, Osmometry, Light scattering (Dynamic
electrochemistry, chemical kinetics, polymer chemistry and colloids and surfaces.
Light Scattering), Viscometry, Gel Permeation Chromatography, MALDI (Matrix Assisted Laser
Desorption/Ionization)
Prerequisites: Inorganic courses: CHY241, CHY323, CHY242, CHY245, CHY553; Organic
Course: CHY321 and CHY322; Physical course: CHY211, CHY212, CHY214, CHY241,
Prerequisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-II (CHY221).
CHY311.
52
53
CHY413: APPLICATIONS OF ANALYTICAL TECHNIQUES
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) MONSOON
Achievements
The various spectroscopic techniques including UV-Vis, IR, 1H NMR, 13C NMR are used in Ph.D. Offer from University of Illinois,
conjunction with more advanced 2D NMR methodologies to determine structures of complex Chicago (UIC)
molecules. The focus of this course is 2D NMR spectroscopy and how it can be used together
with 1D NMR and other spectroscopic methods mentioned above to determine structures of
unknown compounds.
Course Content
Garvisha Mittal
Introduction: General introduction. Calculating double bond equivalents (amount of (2023 Batch)
unsaturation in a compound) from their molecular formulae. This is the first step to structure
determination of an unknown compound.
NMR Spectroscopy: Basis principal of NMR, Multinuclei 1D-NMR spectroscopy, chemical CHY415: MOLECULAR SIMULATIONS
shift variation, identifying peak positions, calculating intensity and correlation with number (3 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES + 0 TUTORIAL + 2 HOUR LAB) MONSOON
of protons in 1H-NMR, 13C-DEPT analysis, complete assignment of peaks of organic and
inorganic compounds.
The course covers fundamental and practical aspects of Molecular Simulation methods. Here
we provide the basic concepts and hands-on practices of the molecular simulation methods. The
Introduction of 2D NMR spectroscopy and their application in solving solution structures.
Homonuclear through-bond correlation 2D NMR (COSY, TOCSY), Heteronuclear through-bond course discusses the details of the MD simulations and Monte-Carlo simulations and it explains
correlation 2D NMR (HSQC, HMBC), Through-space correlation 2D NMR (NOESY, ROESY). how the dynamics and average chemical properties of different systems can be calculated.
Course Content
Application of NMR spectroscopy: Conformational analysis, Host-guest binding
Terminology in molecular simulations: Recap of Molecular Modelling, forcefield equations, and
analysis, estimation of association constants, variable temperature NMR, estimation of
geometry minimizations; Averages and ensemble averages; thermostat and barostat; molecular
thermodynamical parameters, estimation of activation energy of a reaction, estimation
motion; RMS deviations; fluctuations; clustering; radial distribution functions; Correlation
of enantiomeric excess, following progress of a chemical reaction, Fluxionality Analysis of
functions, and Principal Component analysis; constraints and restraints.
inorganic compounds, and other relevant applications.
Practical aspects of molecular simulations: Initial configurations; Periodic Boundary and non-
UV-Vis spectroscopy: Basic principle and method, calibration plot, estimation of concentration
periodic boundary conditions; Equilibrating a simulation; truncating potentials; cutoff potentials;
of unknown solution, estimation of rate of a reaction, understanding of molecular association,
Ewald Summations; analysis and calculating standard errors.
Host-guest interaction, estimation of association constant and stoichiometry of an association
(JOB’s plot), etc.
Molecular dynamics simulations: Basic Principles of Molecular Dynamics Simulations; Dynamics
with continuous potentials; Integration algorithms; Time-steps in Dynamics; Constraint Dynamics;
Chromatography Methods: Introduction, paper chromatography, thin layer chromatography,
SHAKE algorithms; constant pressure and constant temperature dynamics; Potential of Mean
column chromatography, high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), estimation
force; Different Molecular Dynamics programs (Amber, Charmm, Gromacs, Desmond etc); Setting
of purity of a sample, size exclusion chromatography, estimation of molecular weight of
up and running a Molecular Dynamics; Analysing time-dependent properties form Simulations.
macromolecules.
Monte-Carlo simulations: Basic principles of Monte-Carlo Simulations (Metropolis approach);
Mass spectroscopy technique: Principle and applications, different mass spectroscopy
Markov Chain of States; Implementation of Metropolis Methods; Generation of random numbers;
methods (ESI, MALDI, LCMS, GCMS), isotopic distribution.
Monte-Carlo Simulations of rigid- and Flexible molecules and Polymers; Grand-Canonical Ensemble
Problem solving: Solving unknown structures using above spectroscopic techniques.
simulation of Adsorption; Calculating Chemical Potentials using M-C Simulations
Pre-requisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-II (CHY221), Chemistry of Carbonyl Compounds
Pre-requisites: Molecular Modelling (CHY114), Chemical Equilibrium (CHY211).
(CHY222).
54
55
CHY423: NATURAL PRODUCT BASED DRUG DESIGN Natural product based drugs for neurodegenerative disease: Discovery and development of drugs
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES ) MONSOON for Alzheimer, Discovery and development of drugs for Alzheimer, Mode of actions of the drug
molecule for Alzheimer disease.
In drug discovery, natural products played very crucial role especially in the area of anti-
Natural product based antibiotics: Historical background of penicillin discovery, Synthesis
cancer and infectious diseases. Due to unique molecular architecture and stereochemical
of different penicillin derivatives and different modes of action and side effects, Isolation,
features, natural product scaffolds provide unique platform for drug discovery process. In the
characterisation and biosynthesis of azithromycn, Different strategies to synthesise vancomycin,
first part of this course, we are going to discuss fundamental aspects of drug discovery and
Different synthetic strategies, different modes of action and side effects of azithromycin &
current status of natural product-based drug discovery. Then we are going to discuss different
Vancomycin.
synthetic strategies for natural product synthesis. In the second half of this course, we are
going to discuss different natural product-based drugs such as anti-cancer, antibiotic, anti-
Pre-requisites: Chemistry of Carbonyl Compounds (CHY222), Named Organic Reactions and
diabetic and drugs for neurodegenerative disease.
Mechanism (CHY321).
Course Content
CHY424: MEDICINAL CHEMISTRY
Fundamental aspects of drug design: Historical perspective: early natural product-based
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) SPRING
drugs, Definition of key terminology of drug discovery, Extraction, isolation, detection and
characterisation of bioactive molecules.
In this course we will address various issues regarding drugs and its role inside a cell. We will learn
Current scenario of natural product based drugs: Introduction to different types of drug
what are drugs and their different types? How do drugs work? What causes side effects? How do
discovery, Opportunities in natural products based drug discovery, Current challenges in
drugs become resistance? These and other questions will be considered in this course. We will
natural product-based drug discovery.
learn the chemistry and biochemistry necessary to understand the mechanism of drug action and
the process of drug discovery and development. Students will investigate what is known about
Different synthetic strategies for natural product derivatives: Biosynthsis of natural products,
active ingredients in natural remedies. Social, ethical and economic issues related to drugs will be
Diversity Oriented Synthesis, Fragment based Synthesis.
addressed. Instruction will be through a combination of group discussions, reading assignments,
projects, video presentations and lectures. Students are expected to do library research, read
Natural product based anti-cancer drugs (Taxol): Isolation, characterisation and biosynthesis
papers, and present discussion in class.
of Taxol, Different strategies to synthesise Taxol, Different strategies to synthesise Taxol
derivatives, Structure & activity relationship study of Taxol analogues and derivatives, Different
Course Content
modes of action and side effects.
Drugs and the body: What are drugs? What are the common drug targets? Why do they work?
How are drugs transported?
Natural product based anti-cancer drugs (Vinblastine & Vincristine): Isolation,
characterisation and biosynthesis of Vinblastine (VLB) & Vincristine (VCR), Different synthetic
• Types of Drugs and Drug Targets: DNA Damaging agents, Enzymes, mechanism based inhibitors,
strategies, Different synthetic strategies, Structure & activity relationship study of VLB and
covalent inhibitors, Receptors
VCR analogues, Structure & activity relationship study of VLB and VCR analogues, Different
synthetic strategies, different modes of action and side effects.
• Drug Discovery and optimization: Generation of lead compounds, Lead Optimization, Preclinical
studies Clinical trials
Natural product based LDL-lowering agents: Synthesis and modes of action of Lipitor (Pfizer),
Synthesis and modes of action of Crestor (Astra Zeneca).
Drug Metabolism: Phase I, Cytochrome P450, Aldehyde dehydrogenase, Monoamine oxidase
Phase II (GST, UGT)
Natural product based anti-diabatic drugs: Discovery and Development of Antidiabetic Agents
from Natural Products, Discovery and Development of Antidiabetic Agents from Natural
• Transporters Drug toxicity: Reactive intermediate, Adverse effects, Drug-drug interaction,
Products, Discovery and development of antidiabetic agents, Discovery and development of
Polymorphism and its effect on drug action/toxicity: Structure-activity relationships
antidiabetic agents.
• Mechanism of action: Painkillers and opioids (e.g. morphine), Antidiabetic, Antibiotics, Anticancer,
Natural product based drugs anti-HIV drugs: Discovery and development of anti-HIV drugs, NSAIDS, Statins, Blood Thinners, Antacids/Proton pump inhibitors, Antivirals, Antidepressant/
Discovery and development of anti-HIV drugs, Mode of actions of anti-HIV drugs. antipsychotic
56
57
• Synthesis and biosynthesis of drugs, Combinatorial chemistry Applications: Nano-machines, solar cells, coatings, MEMS, nano-medicine, sensors, magnetic
storage devices, miscellaneous, drug delivery and diagnostics.
Prerequisites: Macromolecules (CHY351) or Biochemistry (BIO204) or Cell Biology and Genetics
(BIO201) or Advanced Biochemistry (CHY352). Pre-requisites: Chemical Principles (CHY111) and Chemistry of Solids and Surfaces (CHY342).
CHY444: NANOTECHNOLOGY AND NANOMATERIALS CHY445: FUNDAMENTALS OF CRYSTALLOGRAPHY
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) SPRING (3 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES + 2 HOUR LAB) MONSOON
The next few years will see dramatic advances in atomic-scale technology. Molecular machines, Fundamental understanding of crystallography is discussed in the course.
nanocircuits, and the like will transform all aspects of modern life - medicine, energy, computing,
electronics and defense are all areas that will be radically reshaped by nanotechnology. These Course Content
technologies all involve the manipulation of structures at the atomic level - what used to be the
Introduction: Introduction on Crystallography.
stuff of fantasy is now reality. The economic impact of these developments has been estimated
to be in the trillions of dollars. But, as with all new technologies, ethical and legal challenges will
Theory of X-ray diffraction: What is X-ray, generation and classification of X-ray, X-ray sources,
arise in their implementation and further development. This course will examine the science of
diffraction of X-rays, Bragg’s law.
nanotechnology and place it in the larger social context of how this technology may be, and already
is, applied. Underlying physical science principles will be covered in lecture sessions and students
Crystal Lattice: Crystal Systems, Bravais Lattices, Cubic Lattice, Reciprocal lattice, Reciprocal
will read articles from current news sources and the scientific literature. There will be presentations
relationship, Miller Indices, crystallographic planes and directions, close pack structures,
on scientific literature on topics of student interests, to examine the science and applications
Miller-Bravais indices for hexagonal systems. Bragg’s law in reciprocal space, Ewald’s sphere,
of a well-defined aspect of nanotechnology of their choosing. Lecture material will focus on the
Resolution limits.
principles behind utility of designed nanostructures for many applications.
Crystallographic Symmetry: Concept of symmetry and lattices, notations of symmetry elements,
Course Content 32 point groups and their notations, stereographic projections, Laue symmetry; glide planes,
screw axes and their notations, space groups, equivalent points, determination of systematic
Introduction: Fundamental study of materials in nanosize domain, history of nanomaterials absences for various symmetry or lattice centering, space group symmetry diagrams.
Bulk vs. Nano: Nanosized metals and alloys, semiconductors, a comparison with respective bulk Data reduction: Structure factor, interpretation of intensity data, symmetry from intensity
statistics, Friedel’s law and exponential, vector and general forms of structure factor.
materials.
Phase Problem: Definition, Direct Methods, Phase determination in practice, Patterson Methods,
Methods of preparation of nanomaterials: Chemical vs. physical methods (Ball Mixing, Melt mixing,
Harker line and planes (section), Patterson Symmetry, completion of structure solution, ▲F
sputtering, Laser ablation, electron evaporation, Thermal evaporation).
synthesis.
Chemical methods: Top down and Bottom-up approaches, Physical and chemical methods,
Refinement of Crystal Structures: Refinement by Fourier synthesis, refinement by ▲F synthesis,
Nucleation and growth of nano systems; self-assembly, Chemical vapor deposition; sol-gel
Refinement by least squares method, weighting functions, Goodness-Of-Fit (GOF) parameter,
method, colloidal method, Spray pyrolysis; Annealing, Calcination; Synthesis of metal nanoparticles
treatment of non-hydrogen atoms, and treatment of hydrogen atoms.
by colloidal route; Synthesis of Semiconductor Nanoparticles: Quantum Dots; Synthesis of
semiconductor ZnS; Synthesis of Quantum Dots; Biological methods (Green synthesis Using Refinement of Crystal Structures: Refinement by Fourier synthesis, refinement by F synthesis,
microbes and plants). Refinement by least squares method, weighting functions, Goodness-Of-Fit (GOF) parameter,
treatment of non-hydrogen atoms, and treatment of hydrogen atoms.
Different types of nanomaterials: Zero dimension (0D), one dimension (1D), and two dimensional
nanostructures (2D). Carbon nano-architectures: Fullerene, SWNT, MWNT, Graphene, Practical: Crystal growth, selection, mounting and indexing of crystals, data collection, data
nanodiamonds, etc. reduction, space group determination, structure solution and refinement, introduction to
crystallographic packages (e.g. APEX, SHELXTL, ORTEP etc.), IUCr validation of the data, use
of both Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) for structural search and International Tables for
Properties: Quantum confinement effect, Surface area to volume ratio, surface energy, mechanical,
Crystallography.
thermal, optical, magnetic, electrical and electronic properties.
Characterization of nanomaterials: Characterization Techniques: Spectroscopic/Optical methods;
Prerequisites: Physical methods in Chemistry (CHY214), Chemistry of Solids and Surfaces CHY342.
UV-VIS, Dynamic Light Scattering; (DLS), Raman, IR, XRD, Particle; tracking, Laser Diffraction;
Microscopic characterization: SEM, TEM, AFM.
58
59
CHY456: FOOD CHEMISTRY Legumes: Classification, composition and physicochemical properties.
Vegetables and fruits: Classification, general composition, chemical changes during ripening and
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) SPRING
storage
Food chemistry is the study of chemical processes and interactions of all biological and non-
Jams, Jellies and Pickles: Classification, composition and preservation.
biological components of foods. The biological substances include meat, poultry, lettuce,
beer, and milk as examples. It is similar to biochemistry in its main components such as
Prerequisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-I (CHY122) and Macromolecules (CHY351) or Advanced
carbohydrates, lipids, and protein, but it also includes areas such as water, vitamins, minerals,
Biochemistry (CHY352) or Biochemistry (BIO204).
enzymes, food additives, flavours, and colours.
Course Content
Introduction: Introduction to food, the evolution of food, function of foods, balanced diet,
CHY471: MATERIALS FOR ENERGY
cooking methods.
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) MONSOON
Water: Definition of water in food, the structure of water and ice, types of water, sorption
phenomenon, water activity and packaging, water activity and shelf-life.
Fundamental understanding of the structure-composition-performance relationships of energy
materials. Fabrication and evaluation of prototype clean energy conversion & storage devices
Food lipds: Edible fats and oils - classification and chemical composition, reactions involved
(lithium batteries, Perovskite based solar cells, supercapacitors, and fuel cells).
during deep frying of food.
Course Content
Food proteins: Nature of food proteins (plant and animal proteins), reactions involved in
processing and reactions with alkali, enzyme catalyzed reactions involving hydrolysis and Basics of Inorganic functional materials: Inorganic nanomaterials and quantum dots, Metal oxides
proteolysis, process of texturization of proteins. (0D, 1D, 2D and 3D), Carbon nanomaterials (quantum dots), Porous carbon and graphene.
Food enzymes: Hydrolases, lipases and other important enzymes in food, enzymes in food Fundamental concepts in energy systems: Electrochemical Cell, Faraday’s laws, Electrode
processing, industrial uses of enzymes
Potentials, Thermodynamics of electrochemical cells, Polarization losses in electrochemical cells,
Electrode process and kinetics, Electrical double layer, heterogeneous catalysis (Electrocatalysis).
Browning reactions in food: Enzymatic browning, non – enzymatic browning: maillard
reaction, caramelization reaction, ascorbic acid oxidation
Nanomaterials for energy conversion: Issues and challenges of functional nanostructured materials
for electrochemical energy, Conversion systems, Fuel cells, Principles and nanomaterials design for;
Food carbohydrates: Important polysaccharides (starch, glycogen, cellulose, pectin,
Proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFC); Direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC); Solid-oxide fuel
hemicellulose, gums), chemical reactions of carbohydrates –oxidation, reduction, with acid
cells (SOFC), Current status and future trends.
&alkali, modified celluloses and starches and enzymatic degradation of polysaccharides
Minerals in foods: Major and minor minerals, trace elements in eggs, cereals & cereal Nanomaterials for energy storage (Batteries): Issues and challenges of functional
products, vegetables and fruits, metal uptake in canned foods, toxic metals nanostructured materials for electrochemical energy storage systems, Primary and secondary
batteries (Lithium ion Batteries), Cathode and anode materials, Nanostructured carbon based
Natural food pigments: Introduction and classification, food pigments (chlorophyll, materials, Novel hybrid electrode materials, Current status and future trends.
carotenoids, anthocyanins and flavonoids, beet pigments, caramel)
Nanomaterials for energy storage (Capacitor): Capacitor, electrochemical supercapacitors,
Food additives: Vitamins, amino acids, minerals, aroma compounds in food, flavor enhancers:
electrical double layer model, Principles and materials design, Nanostructured carbon-based
monosodium glutamate, nucleotides, sugar substitutes (sorbitol, saccharin, cyclamate) and
materials, Redox capacitor Nano- oxides, Conducting polymers based materials, Current status and
food colours.
future trends.
Cereals and cereals products: Individual constituents – proteins, lipids, carbohydrates and
Prerequisites: Electrochemistry (CHY241).
vitamins in cereals flour and their relationship in dough making, type of flours for bread
making and confectioneries and influence of additives, physical, chemical changes during
baking and determination of gluten and starch content in flour
60
61
CHY 522: INFORMATICS AND DRUG DISCOVERY CHY 542: SUPRAMOLECULAR CHEMISTRY
(3 CREDITS: 2 LECTURES+ 1 LAB (2 HOUR)) SPRING (3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES) SPRING
This course will introduce the fundamental interactions in protein-drug binding to the
This course will help to understand the basic concept of supramolecular chemistry and their
students and will cover the computational and bioinformatics tools to identify such
quantification in molecular recognition processes. This course will cover the area of non-
interactions. Course will also provide hands-on applications to identify such interaction
covalent interactions using various examples. This course will also deal with the biological
during via lab and practical classes.
supramolecular systems: Ionophores, Porphyrin and other Tetrapyrrolic Macrocycles,
Coenzymes, Neurotransmitters, DNA and Biochemical Self-assembly.
Course Content
Course Content
Introduction: Drug Discovery in the Information-rich age, Applications potential of
Bioinformatics and Cheminformatics.
Non-covalent interactions: Ion pairing, Ion-Dipole Interactions, Dipole-Dipole interactions,
Dipole-Induced Dipole and Ion-Induced Dipole interactions, Hydrogen bonding (definition,
Representation of Chemical Structure and Similarity: Sequence Descriptors,
structure and stability, strength, Halogen bonding, Cation-interactions, Anion-p interactions,
Representations of 2D Molecular Structures: SMILES, Chemical File Formats, 3D Structure,
π•••π interactions, Hydrophobic effect.
Descriptors and Molecular Fingerprints, Substructural Descriptors, Physicochemical
Descriptors, Descriptors from Biological Assays, Representation and characterization of 3D
Aromatic-Aromatic interactions: Benzene crystals, edge-to-face vs. π•••π stacking
Molecular Structures, Pharmacophores, Molecular Interaction Field Based Models, Local interactions, N-H•••π interactions, sulfur-aromatic interactions, Benzene-hexafluoro-
Molecular Surface Property Descriptors, Quantum Chemical Descriptors, Shape Descriptors, benzene π-stacking.
Protein Shape Comparisons, Motif Models.
Supramolecular Host-guest chemistry: Receptors, Lock and Key analogy, Binding constant
analysis
Mapping Structure to Response and Predictive Modeling: Linear Free Energy Relationships,
Quantitative Structure-Activity/Property Relationships (QSAR/QSPR) Modeling,
Supramolecular Artificial Receptors: (a) Cation Binding Hosts -Podand, Crown Ether,
Ligand-Based and Structure-Based Virtual High Throughput Screening, 3D Methods -
Cryptand, Nomenclature, Selectivity, Calixarenes. (b) Anion binding hosts: Challenges and
Pharmacophore Modeling and alignment, ADMET Models, Activity Cliffs, Model Domain of
Concepts, Biological Receptors, Conversion of Cation Hosts to Anion Hosts. (c) Ion pair
Applicability.
receptors (d) Hosts for Neutral Receptors: Clathrates, Inclusion Compounds, Guest Binding
by Cavitands and Cyclodextrins, cucurbituril.
Structure Based Computer Aided-Drug Design: Preparation of Target Structure,
Comparative modelling, Model Refinement and evaluation, Binding Site Detection Solid-State Chemistry: Metal Organic Frameworks (MOFs), Covalent Organic Frameworks
and Characterization, Geometric Method for the Binding site detection, Energy based Supramolecular catalysis and reaction in confined environment: Definition, H-bonded
approached for the binding site detection, Binding pocket matching. cages for catalysis, Self-assembling coordination cages and their uses in encapsulations and
catalysis
Application of Bioinformatics and Cheminformatics for Drug Designing: Molecular Docking,
Transport processes: Dynamic Combinatorial chemistry
Scoring Functions for Evaluation of Protein-ligand Complexes, End point and Alchemical
Method of Binding free energy, Predicting protein structure using Comparative Modelling,
Stimuli responsive solids: Topochemical [2+2] cycloadditions in cinnamic acids under light,
Ensemble Based Approach to Map Druggable site, Evolutionary trace for prediction and
Topochemical photopolymerization in crystals
Redesign of Protein Sites.
Biological supramolecular systems: Ionophores, Porphyrin and other Tetrapyrrolic
Prerequisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-I (CHY122), Basic Organic Chemistry-II (CHY221),
Macrocycles, Coenzymes, Neurotransmitters, DNA and Biochemical Self-assembly.
Mathematics for Chemists-I (CHY103), Mathematics for Chemists-II (CHY104).
Supramolecular Chemistry in Biology: Membranes, Macrocyclic systems, Photosynthesis,
Oxygen transport, Enzymes, Heme analogues.
Prerequisites: Coordination Chemistry (CHY242), Macromolecules (CHY351)
62
63
CHY 548: FRONTIERS IN INORGANIC CHEMISTRY
(4 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES + 1 LAB) SPRING
Lab Schedule:
S. No. Experiments
The course focuses on the fundamental and advanced topics of inorganic chemistry. This
course is also complemented with futuristic laboratory experiments which will help students 1 Expt.1- Rhodium Rainbow: ligand field effects of dirhodium tetraacetate.
to learn advanced laboratory techniques, therefore, it would help for their future research
2 Expt.2- Determination of Δ0 in Cr(III) complexes and spectrochemical series.
endeavors.
3 Expt.3- The synthesis and characterization of Ferrocene and its derivatives.
Course Content
Bonding theories and d-d transition: Crystal Field Theory (CFT), Ligand Field Theory (LFT), Expt.4- Synthesis of compound containing Metal-Metal Quadrupole Bonds and assignment of
4
d* Δ d transition.
Molecular Orbital Theory (MOT), Metal-centered electronic spectra of transition metal
complexes: microstates, determination of ground and all excited state terms of dn ions, 5 Expt.5- Synthesis of a selected Metal-organic Framework (MOF) and characterization.
splitting of dn terms in octahedral and tetrahedral fields, Orgel diagrams, qualitative idea of
Expt.6- Preparation of trans-dichloro-bis(ethylenediamine)cobalt(III) chloride and cis-trans
6
Tanabe-Sugano diagrams, charge transfer spectra according to MO theory. interconversion.
7 Expt.7- Synthesis, Optical Resolution of Co(en)33+.
Metal-metal bonding: Metal-metal bonding (M.O. concept), metal-metal bonded dinuclear
Expt.8- The Preparation of tetraphenylporphyrin and its Metal Complex, comparison of molar
complexes-typical examples, metal-metal multiple bonds, Bonding in dirhenium complexes, 8
extinction coefficient.
d*< d transition
Expt.9- Preparation and Analysis of Potassium Trisoxalatoferrate(III) Trihydrate and photo-
9
chemistry.
Magnetochemistry: Spin and orbital moment, spin-orbit coupling, quenching of orbital
10 Expt.10- NMR Investigation of Molecular Fluxionality: Synthesis of Allylpalladium Complexes.
moment, spin only formula, room temperature and variable-temperature magnetic
moments. Coupling between paramagnetic centers, Ferromagnetism, Antiferromagnetism,
Prerequisites: Inorganic Chemistry-II (CHY245) and Coordination Chemistry (CHY242).
Ferrimagnetism, concept of single Molecular Magnet (SMM).
Co-requisites: Organometallic (CHY323).
Wade’s rules: Wade’s rules, Carboranes, Metalloboranes. Wade-Mingos-Louher rule,
Application of isolobal and isoelectronic relationships, capping rules.
Stereoisomers in coordination chemistry: Linkage isomers, stereo isomerism, cis, trans-
isomers, interconversions, fac and mer-isomerization, Ray-Dutt twist, Bailar twist, trans
directing ligands, trans-effect.
Inorganic photochemistry: Excitation modes in transition metal complexes, fate of
photo-excited species, fluorescence and phosphorescence applied to Inorganic systems,
intramolecular energy transfer, vibrational relaxation, internal conversion and intrasystem
crossing.
Photochemical processes: Photosubstitution and photoelectron transfer reactions in Co, Cr,
and Rh complexes.
Inorganic rings, cages, and clusters: Carbide, nitride, chalcogenide, and halide containing
clusters. Nb and Ta clusters, Mo and W clusters. Cluster compounds in catalysis. Iso-and
hetero-polyoxometalates with respect of V, Mo and W: Syntheses, reactions, structures,
uses. Syntheses, properties, reactions, structures and bonding as applicable in respect
of molybdenum blues, tungsten blue, ruthenium blue, platinum blue, tungsten bronze,
ruthenium red, Crutz-Taube complex, Vaska’s complex.
64
65
B.Sc. (Research) Chemistry B.Sc. (Research) Chemistry with Specialization
Recommended Semester-wise Plan Recommended Semester-wise Plan
S. Course Code Course Title L:T: P Compu-
Material Chem-
Font: Black (all), Blue (PCBM/PCM), Brown (PCB) No. tational Chemical Biology
istry
Chemistry
Semester Course Course Title L:T:P Prerequisites Credits
First Semester MSN
Major
1 CHY111 Chemical Principles 03:01:01 5 5 5
1 CHY103 Mathematics for Chemists-I 3:1:0 None 9+5=14
2 PHY101/PHY103/ Introduction to Physics-I/Fundamentals of 03:01:01 5 5 3
CHY111 Chemical Principles 3:1:1 None
(MSN) 9+6 = 15 PHY255 Physics-I/Introduction to Biophysics
PHY101/ Introductions to Physics-I/Fundamentals of Phys- 3:1:1/3:0:0 None
4 BIO201/BIO113 Cell biology and Genetics 02:00:01 0 0 3
PHY103/ ics-I/
CHY103 Mathematics for Chemists-I 03:01:00 4 4 4
PHY255 Introduction to Biophysics
Semester Credits 14 14 15
BIO201* Cell biology and Genetics* 2:0:1 PCB at 10+2
Second Semester SPR
2 CHY104 Mathematics for Chemists-II 2:2:0 None 14+8= 22
CHY104 Mathematics for Chemists-II 03:01:00 4 4 4
CHY114 Molecular modelling# 1:0:1 None
(SPR) 14+4= 18
5 CHY114 Molecular modelling 01:00:01 2 2 2
CHY122 Basic Organic Chemistry-I 2:1:1 CHY111
1 CHY122 Basic Organic Chemistry-I 02:01:01 4 4 4
CHY144 Inorganic Chemistry-I 2:1:1 CHY111
2 CHY144 Inorganic Chemistry-I 03:00:01 4 4 4
PHY102/ Introductions to Physics-II/Fundamentals of Phys- 3:1:1/3:1:0 None
PHY104/ ics-II/ 3 PHY102/PHY104/ Introduction to Physics-II/Fundamentals of 03:01:01 5 5 4
PHY108 Physics-II/Physics For Life
PHY108 Physics for Life
6 BIO113 Essentials of Biology 02:00:01 3 3 0
BIO113* Essentials of Biology* 2:0:1 non-PCB at 10+2
Semester Credits 22 22 18
3 CHY211 Chemical Equilibrium 3:0:1 CHY111 17
Third Semester MSN
CHY214 Physical Methods in Chemistry# 2:0:1 CHY111
(MSN)
CHY221 Basic Organic Chemistry-II 2:1:1 CHY122 1 CHY211 Chemical Equilibrium 03:00:01 4 4 4
CHY241 Electrochemistry 2:0:0 CHY111, CHY144 2 CHY245 Inorganic Chemistry-II 03:00:01 4 4 4
CHY245 Inorganic Chemistry-II 3:0:1 CHY111, CHY144 3 CHY221 Basic Organic Chemistry-II 02:01:01 4 4 4
4 CHY212 Chemical Applications of Group Theory 3:0:0 CHY111, MAT103/CHY103 11 4 CHY241 Electrochemistry 02:00:00 2 2 2
CHY222 Chemistry of Carbonyl Compounds 2:1:1 CHY122, CHY221
(SPR)
5 CHY243/CHY215/ Introduction to Material Chemistry/Computa- 02:00:00 2 2 2
CHY242 Coordination Chemistry 3:0:1 CHY111, CHY122, CHY144 CHY223 tional Chemistry/Chemical Biology
5 CHY311 Quantum Mechanics 3:0:1 CHY111, 16
PHY101/103/102/104, 6 CHY214 Physical Methods in Chemistry 02:00:01 3 3 3
(MSN) MAT101/103/CHY103;
Semester Credits 19 19 19
CHY313
Fourth Semester SPR
CHY313 Molecular Spectroscopy 3:1:0 CHY111, CHY214
1 CHY222 Chemistry of Carbonyl Compounds 02:01:01 4 4 4
CHY 321 Named Organic Reactions and Mechanism 2:0:0 CHY221
CHY323 Organometallic Chemistry 3:0:0 CHY242 2 CHY242 Coordination Chemistry 03:00:01 4 4 4
CHY351 Macromolecules 3:0:0 CHY221 3 CHY212 Chemical Applications of Group Theory 03:00:00 3 3 0
6 CHY322 Heterocyclic Chemistry 3:0:0 CHY221, CHY321 6+6 = 12
4 CHY246/CHY216/ Characterization and analysis of materials/ 02:00:01 3 3 4
CHY342 Chemistry of Solids and Surfaces 3:0:0 CHY111, CHY214
(SPR) CHY226 Modelling Chemical Reactions/Fundamentals
01:00:02
of Protein Chemistry
or PHY101/102/103/104 6+6+3 = 15 03:01:00
CHYXYZ Electives 3:0:0 †
CHYXYZ Electives 3:0:0 † 5 BIO205 Bioanalytical Techniques 02:00:01 0 0 3
CHYXYZ Electives 3:0:0 † Semester Credits 14 14 15
7** CHY498 Senior Project 0:0:6 None 6+3 = 9 Fifth Semester MSN
CHYXYZ Electives 3:0:0 † 1 CHY311 Quantum Mechanics 03:01:00 4 4 4
(MSN)
8 CHY499 Senior Project 0:0:6 None 6+3 = 9 2 CHY313 Molecular Spectroscopy 03:01:00 4 4 4
CHYXYZ Electives 3:0:0 † 3 CHY315/CHY321 Computing for Chemistry with Python/ 02:00:01/ 0 3 2
(SPR)
Named Organic Reactions and Mechanism
Graduation Total Credits 110 02:00:00
*BIO113/BIO201: any one course 4 CHY323 Organometallic Chemistry 03:00:00 3 3 0
# 2h lab 5 CHY351 Macromolecules 03:00:00 0 0 3
† specific to course; **CHY400 Colloquium (1 credit needs to be taken)
Semester Credits 11 14 13
66
67
Sixth Semester SPR
1 CHY324/CHY322 Organic Functional Materials and Applica- 03:00:00/ 3 0 3
tions/Heterocyclic chemistry
03:00:00
2 CHY342/CHY352 Chemistry of Solids and Surfaces/Advanced 03:00:00 3 3 3 FUTURE
Biochemistry
COURSES
3 CHY346/522/348 Nanostructured Inorganic Materials and Ap- 03:00:00/ 3 3 3
plications/Informatics & Drug Discovery/Adv.
Bioinorganic Chemistry 02:00:01/
03:00:00
CHY 354: BIOCHEMICAL TOXICOLOGY
4 CHYXYZ/BIO305 Elective/Elective/Elective/ Genomics and 03:00:00 3 3 3/3 (3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES)
Proteomics
Semester Credits 12 9 12
Seventh Semester MSN
1 CHY497 Senior Project 00:00:06 6 6 6 • General Principals of toxicology
2 CHY413/CHY471/ Application of Analytical Techniques/Materi- 03:00:00/ 3/3 3/3 3/3 • Classes of toxicants
CHY415/CHY423 als for Energy/Molecular Simulations/Natural
Product Based Drug Design 01:01:01/ • Metabolism
• P450 and P450 catalyzed reactions
03:00:00
• Other phase 1 reactions
3 CHY400 Chemistry Colloquium* 01:00:00 1 1 1
• Phase II/Conjugation reactions
Semester Credits 9 9 9
• Bioactivation and Reactive intermediates
Eighth Semester SPR
• Reaction of Chemicals with DNA
1 CHY498 Senior Project 00:00:06 6 6 6
• DNA adducts and its consequences (Mutagenesis, DNA
2 CHYXYZ Elective/Elective/Elective 03:00:00 3 3 3
repair and Translesion DNA synthesis)
Semester Credits 9 9 9
• Protein adducts
Total 110 110 110
• Genetic toxicology (polymorphism)
• Molecular basis of toxicology
• Biomarkers
• Natural Products
• Cellular Oncogenesis
• Metals
• Drug induced liver damage
• Mass spectrometry and other analytical methods
Prerequisites: Macromolecules (CHY351) or Biochemistry
(BIO204) or Cell Biology and Genetics (BIO201)
CHY111 or Advanced Biochemistry (CHY352).
68
69
CHY412: DYNAMICS OF CHEMICAL REACTIONS
(3 CREDITS: 3 LECTURES)
The principles of chemical kinetics, as well as equilibrium and non-equilibrium statistical
mechanics will be covered in this advanced course. The associated computer lab will
introduce the student to classical and ab initio quantum molecular dynamics and Monte
Carlo simulations of liquids and proteins. The techniques learned in this course will applied
to substantive research projects that the students will design, execute, and present. Students
will be encouraged to seek avenues for publication of their most significant results
Prerequisites: Chemical Equilibrium (CHY211), Chemical Binding (CHY311) and
Macromolecules (CHY351).
CHY421: ORGANIC SYNTHESIS
(3 CREDITS)
Students will gain expertise in the techniques of organic synthesis. A major project will be
the development of a research proposal based on the student’s own question. Background
from the literature will motivate the proposal and initial experiments will be proposed.
Prerequisites: Named Organic Reactions and Mechanisms (CHY321) or Heterocyclic
Chemistry (CHY322).
CHY452: INTRODUCTION TO BIO-ORGANIC CHEMISTRY
(3 CREDITS)
Basic structure of nucleic acids, proteins, lipids and carbohydrates; biological functions and
biosynthesis of precursors.
CHY453: FORENSIC CHEMISTRY
(3 CREDITS)
Chemistry for Forensic Scientists, Skills for Forensic Scientists Crime Scene Science, Aspects
of Forensic Science, Application of Forensic Science Forensic Science Dissertation, Advances
in Forensic Chemistry, Forensic Toxicology.
Prerequisites: Basic Organic Chemistry-II (CHY221) or Macromolecules (CHY351) or
Advanced Biochemistry (CHY351) or Biochemistry (BIO204) or Cell Biology and Genetics
(BIO201).
70
71
Department of Chemistry
Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence
NH 91, Tehsil Dadri, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh - 201314,
India
www.snu.edu.in
72