
ANALYTICAL THINKING, PHYSICAL AND
Why Shiv Nadar CREATIVITY, PROBLEM-SOLVING: EMOTIONAL WELL-BEING:
with research programs, internships, a vibrant campus life on our
Institution of Eminence? entrepreneurial opportunities, and more, 286-acre green campus is
our curriculum teaches key skills designed just for that
Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence is a multidisciplinary
research university established in 2011 by Mr. Shiv Nadar, one
JOBS, HIGHER STUDIES
of Asia’s foremost philanthropists and a pioneer of the
OR START-UPS:
ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE:
technological revolution in India. The four Schools at the
our faculty come from we prepare our students
University offer undergraduate, postgraduate, and doctoral
top institutions in India for a variety of aspirations
degrees in Engineering, Natural Sciences, Humanities and
and the world
Social Sciences, and Management & Entrepreneurship. It is the
youngest university to be recognized as an Institution of
Eminence by the Government of India, a distinct category of
higher education institutions that “strive to become a top
Why
hundred Institutions in the world over time”. In the Govern-
Shiv Nadar
ment’s National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF), the
University has been the youngest institution in the 'top 100' Institution of
Overall list for the last five years. Eminence?
Why Study Economics at
Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence?
The Department of Economics is committed to graduate thesis. There are ample opportunities
producing leaders for the 21st century who will for students to take up summer internships to
push the boundaries of what is deemed possible gain industry experience. The programs are
and enlarge the visions of a just society through student-centric, and faculty encourage students
their work. Our undergraduate and postgradu- to think critically, be analytical, and ask
ate programs in economics are premised on questions to develop an independent mindset.
building critical faculties and fostering indepen- They help in fostering not just a career but also
dent thinking. Our four-year undergraduate personal growth of the individual self. The
program provides a holistic education in Department of Economics has a close-knit
economic theory and quantitative economics. alumni network and endeavors to continue
The program has a research focus, where helping students become leaders of tomorrow.
among other things, students write an under-
Curriculum
B.Sc. (Research) in Economics Program Structure
A unique and state-of-the-art curriculum promises an Economics training at Shiv Nadar IoE aims to provide credits in UWE (University Wide Electives) and CCC
exciting learning experience for all students. The students with a thorough understanding of the core (Common-course-curriculum) courses. Among the Major
foundational pillars of the program are its faculty, who areas of economics, followed by instruction in subfields courses, each student must have at least 96 credits in
are recognized researchers in their respective fields. To of the student’s own choosing in the final years. Economics obtained over the period of the undergradu-
the extent possible, courses include independent Students must complete an undergraduate thesis ate program. This includes three courses (i.e., Academic
research components such as term papers, project as part of the program. They can choose from a Writing, Logic and Scientific Reasoning, and Modernity:
presentations, etc. This degree is designed to be wide range of subfields including, but not limited to, A Critical Exploration) that are necessary for all students
comparable to internationally acclaimed programs and game theory and industrial organization, development enrolled in SHSS undergraduate programs. In addition,
combines rigorous training with flexibility in choosing economics, political economy, public economics, students must take one course each on Calculus,
elective courses. The aim is to produce students ready environmental economics, macroeconomics, interna- Probability, Statistics, and Computer Programming. They
for market opportunities, be it jobs in the corporate tional trade, labour economics, and money and banking, must complete all requirements for a degree in a
sector, public sector, non-governmental/social sector, or among others. minimum of three years and a maximum of six years.
a desire to pursue higher studies in economics or related Nearly all students complete the degree in four years.
disciplines. The program is holistic as evidenced by the To graduate with a Major in Economics, each student
course structure, which includes subjects like academic requires at least 108 credits in Major courses and 42
writing, probability, and statistics.
Major in Economics | Suggested Semester-wise Schedule
1st YEAR 2nd YEAR
Semester 1 Semester 2 Semester 3 Semester 4
Academic Writing Modernity: An Interdisciplinary Exploration Game Theory Advanced Microeconomics
Logic & Scientific Reasoning Principles of Macroeconomics Intermediate Macroeconomics International Economics
Principles of Microeconomics Intermediate Microeconomics Introduction to Statistics Introductory Econometrics
Calculus I Introduction to Probability UWE credits – 4 Introduction to Computer Programming*
CCC credits – 3 CCC credits – 3 CCC credits – 3 UWE credits – 4
CCC credits – 3
3rd YEAR 4th YEAR
Semester 5 Semester 6 Semester 7 Semester 8
Development Economics Departmental Elective IV Research Project (4 credits) Research Project (8 credits)
Departmental Elective I Departmental Elective V Departmental Elective VII Departmental Elective VIII
Departmental Elective II Departmental Elective VI UWE credits – 4
Departmental Elective III UWE credits – 4
UWE credits – 4 UWE credits – 4
*This course is currently offered by the Mathematics Department as MAT110 and by the
CCC credits – 3 CCC credits – 3 Computer Science Department as CSD101.
B.Sc. (Research) in Economics and
Finance Program Structure
The department successfully launched a new B.Sc. To graduate with a Major in Economics and Finance, Finance courses (24 credits cumulatively). A student
(Research) program in Economics and Finance in the each student must obtain at least 155 credits, of which must gain at least six credits each in elective courses
academic year 2020-21. This program is an excellent at least 113 credits must be obtained from the Major offered by the Department of Economics and the
example of the interdisciplinary ethos of Shiv Nadar IoE. courses and 42 credits must be gained from the UWE Department of Finance, Accounting and Control. The
It has been jointly developed and conducted by the (University wide electives) and CCC (Common- program culminates with a semester-long internship
Department of Economics under the School of course-curriculum) courses. The 113 credits that must (scheduled in the eighth semester, carrying 12 credits).
Humanities and Social Sciences, and the Department of be obtained from the Major courses include compulsory Students may opt for a research thesis instead of the
Finance, Accounting and Control under the School of core courses (77 credits), elective courses in Economics internship, subject to a mutual agreement between
Management and Entrepreneurship. and Finance (24 credits), and one semester-long them and their faculty thesis advisor. The student must
internship (12 credits). Compulsory courses are split acquire at least 42 credits from UWE and CCC courses.
The curriculum has been expressly designed keeping in between Economics and Finance core courses (54 Students are encouraged to develop technological
mind the increasing need and relevance for knowledge credits cumulatively), Academic Writing (4 credits, expertise through departmental and
of both economics and finance that equips students with offered by the Department of English), Calculus, university-wide-electives. A student must complete all
a broad and deep understanding of the connections Probability, Statistics, and Computer Programming (16 requirements for a degree in a minimum of three years and
between the structure and working of the economy with credits cumulatively, offered by the Department of a maximum of six years.
the functioning of markets and institutions in general, Mathematics), and a Research Seminar (3 credits).
and financial markets and financial institutions in Elective courses are split between Economics and
particular.
Major in Economics and Finance | Suggested Semester-wise Schedule
1st YEAR 2nd YEAR
Semester 1 Semester 2 Semester 3 Semester 4
Introduction to Financial Accounting – 3 credits Managerial Accounting – 3 credits Corporate Finance– 4 credits IAPM – 3 credits
Principles of Microeconomics – 4 credits Principles of Macroeconomics – 4 credits Game Theory – 4 credits Introductory Econometrics – 4 credits
Academic Writing – 4 credits Intermediate Microeconomics – 4 credits Intermediate Macroeconomics – 4 credits Departmental Elective I – 3 credits
Logic & Scientific Methods– 4 credits Introduction to Probability– 4 credits Introduction to Computing – 4 credits Financial Markets & Institutions – 3 credits
Calculus I – 4 credits UWE+CCC credits – 6 Introduction to Statistics – 4 credits UWE+CCC credits – 7
UWE+CCC credits – 1.5 UWE+CCC credits – 1.5
3rd YEAR 4th YEAR
Semester 5 Semester 6 Semester 7 Semester 8
Options, Futures & Derivatives – 3 credits FinTech – 3 credits Departmental Elective V – 3 credits Internship/RA (6 Months) – 12 credits
Financial Econometrics – 4 credits Departmental Elective III – 4 credits Departmental Elective VI – 3 credits
Departmental Elective II – 4 credits Departmental Elective IV – 4 credits Departmental Elective VII – 3 credits
UWE+CCC credits – 8 UWE+CCC credits – 9 Research Seminar – 3 credits
UWE+ CCC credits – 9
M.Sc. Economics The first-year coursework consists of 7 compulsory courses, one elective course, and one non-credit course:
The two-year master’s program in economics promises Semester I (Monsoon Semester) Semester II (Spring Semester)
to provide students with training within a nurturing
environment supported by faculty members working at Microeconomics I Microeconomics II
the forefront of research in their respective fields. The Macroeconomics I Macroeconomics II
curriculum imparts a theoretical foundation with a Mathematical Methods Econometrics I
strong emphasis on real-world application, resulting in a Statistics Elective I
Programming Language (non-credit)
solid grounding in quantitative methods and
econometrics.
The second year (Semester III and Semester IV) involves one compulsory course and seven electives:
Program Structure
Semester III (Monsoon Semester) Semester IV (Spring Semester)
The master’s program involves the successful Econometrics II Elective V
completion of 16 courses (8 compulsory and 8 optional). Elective II Elective VI
Elective III Elective VII
Additionally, students must complete a non-credit
Elective IV Elective VIII
course on Programming Language offered in the first
semester.
The following is the list of potential optional courses offered by the department:
Advanced Mathematical Economics Corporate Finance
Industrial Organization International Finance
Public Economics Time Series Analysis
International Trade Environmental Economics Development Economics
Behavioural Economics Social Choice Theory
Growth and Business Cycle Labour Economics
Machine Learning in Economics Mechanism Design
Health Economics Political Economy Workshop
Financial Economics Macroeconomics Workshop
In Semesters III and IV, students can also opt for a project course in lieu of a taught course, spread over two semesters, where
they work under the supervision of a faculty member to develop a master’s thesis.
Note: The course structure is subject to change with approval from the university’s academic council. Students will be informed about these changes
(if any) prior to the commencement of the program.
Ph.D. in Economics
The doctoral program involves eight internal The students get several opportunities to
economics courses in the first year covering explore various research topics in their
micro, macro, econometrics and first year through seminars and
computational economics. The courses workshops. With this insight, they are
enable students to develop advanced able to choose their specific area of
technical skills and pursue research in an research.
extensive array of subjects, including
development economics, behavioural
economics, environmental economics,
macroeconomics, labour economics,
economic growth, public economics, game
theory, network theory, industrial
organization, and political economy.
Department of Economics Faculty
Our esteemed faculty members have Ph.D.s from renowned universities such as the University of Maryland, the University of Minnesota,
Pennsylvania State University, the University of British Columbia, Vanderbilt University, Indian Statistical Institute, Stony Brook University,
Maastricht University, University of Southern California, University of California (Irvine), University of Missouri-Columbia, Southern
Methodist University, and Arizona State University.
Our faculty has been published in top international journals like Economics Letters, Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Applied
Economics, Ecological Economics, Journal of Economic Behaviour and Organization, Journal of Development Studies, World Bank Economic Review,
Journal of Economic Theory, PLOS ONE, Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Journal of Association
of Environmental and Resource Economics, Games and Economic Behaviour, Journal of Mathematical Economics, and Economic Journal.
Several of our faculty regularly publish in national and local media like Times of India, Economic Times, Mint, Hindustan Times, Hindu Business
line, Telegraph, AnandaBazar Patrika, Indian Express, and Moneycontrol.
Our esteemed professors have received prestigious awards and grants from various national and international organizations. The most
recent being M.J. Manohar Rao Award 2021, Honorary Fellow at Global Labour Organization, and Marty Weinbaum Award. In addition,
our faculty members have been awarded research grants from organizations such as the International Growth Centre (IGC), the Australian
Centre for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR), Azim Premji Foundation, Cssr-Equipment, Honk Kong University of Science and
Technology, among others.
Academic Collaborations
Shiv Nadar IoE has ongoing academic collaborations with several international universities, from which students of economics can benefit. For instance, the School of Humanities and Social
Sciences has a tie-up that allows students to visit the National Yunlin University of Science and Technology under an exchange program. A more detailed list of the existing collaborations can
be found below:
International Academic Collaborations
Partner Institution School / Department Scope of Collaboration
1. University of Michigan – Ann Arbor Humanities and Social Sciences Student Mobility, Joint research, Hosted the first joint faculty workshop in February 2018, Joint
Ph.D. supervision for Shiv Nadar IoE research scholars from School of Humanities and Social Sciences
2. Heidelberg University, Germany Humanities and Social Sciences Erasmus Program, Faculty and student mobility, Academic exchange
3. Ontario In’tl (Consortia of 9 Canadian Universities) All Student Mobility
4. Deakin University, Australia (MoU expired, Management & Economics Comprehensive Partnership involving joint research, Faculty and student mobility, Training
under renewal)
5. University of California, Berkeley All Student mobility; to organize a joint program on higher education leadership development in India
6. University of Bologna, Italy All University-wide partnership – includes Student mobility, Faculty mobility, Joint research, Teaching, etc.
7. University of Wisconsin-Madison All VISP - Visiting International Students Program (outbound mobility)
8. University of Essex All Students’ mobility and Joint research projects
9. University of Warwick Humanities and Social Sciences Student exchange program
10. National Yunlin University of Science and SHSS Student exchange program, Faculty exchange program, Short term academic
Technology, Taiwan program, Staff development projects and Joint Research
11. Tamkang University Economics Student exchange program
12. Mondragon University All Exchange of students, Exchange of academic and administrative staff, Joint research,
Industry exchange, Short programs, Participation in seminars and conferences
13. Gdansk University of Technology All Schools Student exchange, Research and Educational purposes
14. National Quemoy University All Schools Student exchange, maximum 5 students
Other Global Opportunities
1. NTU-India Research Internship All schools Summer/Semester research internship at NTU through University nominations
2. FRT Future Research Talent, Australian National All schools Semester research internship through nomination
University
3. MITACS and other opportunities in Canadian All schools Only SICI members can apply, and Shiv Nadar IoE is a SICI member (Shastri Indo Canadian
universities Institute)
4. GYSS Global Young Scientist Summit All schools Summit through University nominations
Pathway to Progress
Students have numerous opportunities after Many of them have pursued an M.A. and
completing their degree from Shiv Nadar Ph.D. in economics from top international
IoE. In the past, our undergraduate students universities such as Columbia University,
have been placed in research-intensive NYU, LSE, and Paris School of Economics,
organizations like J-PAL and big corpora- among others. Some opt for a domestic
tions like DE Shaw, Deloitte, and McKinsey, master's degree at reputed Indian
among others. Students also get placed in institutes such as the Delhi School of
economics-related positions at media Economics, Indira Gandhi Institute of
organizations such as Bloomberg, The Hindu, Developmental Research, etc. A few also
etc. go for an MBA at the top IIMs. By acquir-
ing degrees from prestigious institutions in
However, a majority of our undergraduate India and abroad, our students are
students prefer going for higher studies. assuredly on the pathway to progress.
Student Outcomes
Over the years, the Economics Purdue University, Texas A&M, Iowa State
Department has attracted a talented University, UC Riverside, etc. Most
cohort of undergraduate and graduate students opt for campus placement and
students. Our graduates have secured get placed in reputed organizations such
admission to Ph.D. programs at stellar as Deloitte, Futures First, and Bank of
institutions such as the University of America.
Pennsylvania, University of Pittsburgh,
Admissions Eligibility
Eligibility for Undergraduate Programs
The undergraduate admissions are based on both class 12 marks
(which determines the eligibility of students to apply) and the
student’s performance in the Shiv Nadar University Scholastic
Aptitude Test (SNUSAT).
Please note that students seeking admission in either of the
Economics programs must have Mathematics as a subject in class XII.
Eligibility for Master’s Program
The minimum qualification for admission to the M.Sc. program is an
undergraduate degree (in any discipline) with 55% in aggregate.
Mathematics in classes XI and XII is compulsory. Selection to the
master’s program is based purely on the performance in the admission
test conducted by the department.
Eligibility for Doctoral Program
Prospective candidates must have obtained at least 55% in aggregate
in a postgraduate degree in any discipline. Candidates will be selected
based on their performance in the admission process (subject to the
minimum eligibility criteria being met).
Applicants who are shortlisted following the first stage of the
screening process are further interviewed before final selection.
