D E
EPARTMENT OF CONOMICS
SCHOOL OF HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Undergraduate Prospectus 2021-22
Bachelor of Science (Research)
Economics
CONTACT INFORMATION:
Department of Economics,
P.O. Shiv Nadar University,
Greater Noida
Pin: 201314
Contact: Ms. Shubra Chetan (Programme Manager)
+91-120-7170100
econug@snu.edu.in/
shubra.chetan@snu.edu.in
2
3
Economics at SNU
Modern economics, which has its origins in political economy, has vastly expanded in
scope from its core areas of study of markets and the overall economy. With its emphasis
on understanding how individuals, groups, and societies decide to employ limited
resources in an increasingly inter-dependent world, economics provides for powerful tools
for analysing not only economic interactions but also understanding social and cultural
phenomena. In designing policies and mechanisms to promote organizational or societal
outcomes that are feasible, valuable, sustainable, and efficient, modern economics has
made significant contributions in deepening our understanding and framing policies that
affect various facets of life and society society -- businesses, finance, industry, politics,
public policy evaluation and implementation, social issues -- and the economy at large.
The Department of Economics at Shiv Nadar University is one of the premier Economics
departments in India. Established in 2012, it has quickly established its reputation as one
of the leading centres of Economics education and research. The department is comprised
of faculty who have an active research agenda in various sub-disciplines in economics
including economic theory, macroeconomics, development economics, environmental
economics, international trade, labour economics, health economics, public economics
and finance. Currently, the department offers an undergraduate major and an
undergraduate minor in Economics.
The Undergraduate Major in Economics
Our B.Sc. (Research) program is one of a kind in India. The core strength of the program
is drawn from the faculty members it will be taught by, who are active researchers in their
respective fields. To the extent possible, courses include independent research
components in the form of term papers, presentations etc. Our B.Sc. (Research) degree is
designed to be comparable to internationally acclaimed programs, and combines rigorous
training with flexibility in choice of elective courses. The aim is to produce students who
are ready for opportunities in the market: be it jobs in the corporate sector, public sector,
non-governmental/social sector or a desire to pursue higher studies in economics or
related disciplines.
Programme structure:
Economics training at SNU aims to provide students with a thorough understanding of
the core areas in economics followed by instruction in sub fields of the student’s own
choosing in the final years. Students will also have to finish an undergraduate thesis project
as part of the programme. The students can choose from a wide range of sub fields
including, but not limited to, game theory and industrial organization, development
economics, political economy, public economics, environmental economics,
macroeconomics, international trade, labour economics, money and banking etc.
To graduate with a Major in Economics, each student needs at least 108 credits in Major
courses and 42 credits in UWE (University-wide-elective) and CCC (Common-course-
curriculum) courses. Among the Major courses, each student must have at least 96 credits
in Economics obtained over the course of the undergraduate programme. This includes
three courses (i.e. Academic Writing, Logic and Scientific Reasoning, and Modernity: A
4
Critical Exploration) that are required for all students enrolled in SHSS undergraduate
programs. In addition, the student must take one course each on Calculus, Probability,
Statistics and Computer Programming. For more details please refer to the UG students’
handbook published by the University. A student must complete all requirements for a
degree in a minimum of three years and a maximum of six years. Nearly all students
complete the degree in four years.1
Programme Learning Outcomes:
After completion of the course
1. students will be able to explain the core concepts in economics such as opportunity
cost, markets, equilibrium, comparative advantage, inflation and growth;
2. students will have an in-depth understanding of the optimization tools used in
economics and will be able to apply these tools to solve problems in economics;
3. students will be able to graphically present data and use statistical and econometric
tools for data analysis;
4. students will attain programming skills and knowledge of statistical software
packages used in economics;
5. students will attain important research skills by working on an independent
research project during the last year of the program. They will be able to formulate
a research idea, conduct literature review and carry out the analysis;
6. ability to comprehend and deal with complex societal problems;
7. students will be able to apply their knowledge in economics to evaluate economic
policies like public workfare programs, taxation, subsidies, trade protection,
sustainability etc.;
8. students will be able to formulate logical arguments in a written form;
9. students will be able to effectively communicate scholarly material in economics
through academic presentations.
1 For Major change to Economics eligibility, please contact the department UG Adviser.
5
Major in Economics | Coursework and Credits Overview
Courses Typical timeline Credits
Academic Writing
Semester 1 4 Credits
A course for all students in the School of Humanities and Social Sciences
Logic and Scientific Reasoning
Semester 1 4 Credits
A course on quantitative methods specially designed for students in the
School of Humanities and Social Sciences
Understanding Modernity
Semester 2 4 credits
A course taught by the SHSS faculty across the disciplines
Calculus I
Semester 1 4 Credits
Generally Offered by Department of Mathematics
Introduction to Probability
Semester 2 4 Credits
Generally Offered by Department of Mathematics or Economics
Introduction to Statistics
Semester 3 4 Credits
Generally Offered by Department of Mathematics or Economics
Introduction to Computing and
Programming/Computing Semester 4 3 or 4 Credits
Generally Offered by Department of Mathematics or CSE
Core Courses in Economics: Foundation Courses 10 x 4 = 40
Semester 1 to 6
Intensive courses in Economics that builds basic understanding and Credits
theoretical foundation.
8 Departmental Elective Courses
Selected from a range of course offerings covering diverse areas and sub-
fields
Semester 5 to 8
Students may propose to take up to1 elective as Independent Study in a 8 x 4 = 32
specific area of interest with the approval of the Department and under the Credits
instruction of a faculty member.
Research Workshop and Undergraduate Thesis
4+8 = 12
Students will conduct supervised research on a topic of their choice and
Semester 7 and 8
prepare a thesis for submission in their final year Credits
6
Major in Economics | An Example of a Semester-wise Schedule
Semester 1 Semester 2
1. Academic Writing 1. Modernity: An
2. Logic & Scientific Interdisciplinary Exploration
Reasoning 2. Principles of
1st Year 3. Principles of Macroeconomics
Microeconomics 3. Intermediate
4. Calculus I Microeconomics
5. CCC credits – 3 4. Introduction to Probability
5. CCC credits – 3
Semester 3 Semester 4
1. Game Theory 1. International Economics
2. Intermediate 2. Introductory Econometrics
Macroeconomics 3. Introduction to Computer
2nd Year 3. Introduction to Statistics Programming2
4. UWE credits – 4 4. UWE credits – 4
5. CCC credits – 3 5. UWE credits – 4
6. CCC credits – 3
Semester 5 Semester 6
3rd Year 1. Development Economics 1. Advanced Microeconomics
2. Departmental Elective II 2. Departmental Elective V
3. Departmental Elective III 3. Departmental Elective VI
4. Departmental Elective IV 4. Departmental Elective VII
5. UWE credits – 4 5. UWE credits – 4
6. CCC credits – 3 6. CCC credits – 3
4th Year
Semester 7 Semester 8
1. RESEARCH PROJECT 1. RESEARCH PROJECT
(4 credits) (8 credits)
2. Departmental Elective VII 2. Departmental Elective VIII
3. UWE credits – 4
2
This course is currently offered by the Mathematics department as MAT110 and by the Computer
Science department as CSD101.
7
The Undergraduate Minor in Economics
In order for a student to earn a Minor in Economics he/she needs to complete a minimum
of 24 credits from the basket of UWE courses in Economics which are offered. Of these
24 credits, the students are required to bring credits from four core Economics courses3
listed below and any two elective courses in Economics (provided they meet the
prerequisites for these electives). These elective courses may also be chosen from the
Economics courses which are offered as core courses to the students of the Major-in-
Economics programme.4
1. ECO 101: Principles of Microeconomics5
2. ECO 102: Principles of Macroeconomics6
3. ECO 213: Basic Data Analysis and Econometrics/ECO 203: Introductory
Econometrics
4. ECO 301: Intermediate Microeconomics
5. Elective
6. Elective
3
Economics courses have Mathematics courses as prerequisites. Please refer to the course descriptions
for information on these prerequisites.
4
Barring ECO 101, ECO 102, ECO 213/ECO 203 and ECO 301.
5
Students who have taken MEC103, their credits from ECO101 are not valid if they take up ECO101
and vice versa. They should take up any other Economics course of 4 credits to complete 24 credits.
6
Students who have taken MEC104, their credits from ECO102 are not valid if they take up ECO102
and vice versa. They should take up any other Economics course of 4 credits to complete 24 credits.
8
COURSE DESCRIPTIONS
Each course is conducted through lecture, tutorial and practical hours indicated as (L:T:P)
at the end of the course descriptions below.7
GENERAL COURSES
ENG 104: Academic Writing
This is a course in critical reading, critical thinking and critical writing. You will read a
selection of essays and learn to write a 5-page academic paper that makes an argument by
constructing evidence from the readings discussed in class. This is a writing intensive class.
You will write 5 papers in 2 drafts each, so 10 papers in all. Expect to be either writing or
revising a draft every single week of the semester. This is a workshop style course where
the course will run on your constant class participation in discussions, peer reviews and
group work. The readings will include among others, essays by: Ruth Vanita “Was Sita
Mrs. Ram?”: Sunil Kumar “Naming”; Derek Jenson “Silence”, Alain de Botton
“Transmission Engineering”: Emily Martin “The Egg and Sperm”. (3:1:0)
SOC 102: Understanding Modernity
Modernity has become a defining feature in contemporary societies. It marks the coming
together over the centuries of philosophical principles and technological developments,
the two trends strengthening each other. Through those means the modern human aims
at freeing itself from the previous bounds of former beliefs in which human actions were
defined and limited.
Modernity defines itself as a point of departure from pre-existing societies and locates its
genesis in the Renaissance and 18th century scientific investigative mind embodied by the
encyclopedists. From the 19th century onwards, modernity has defined the core principles
of policy making and philosophical debates or at least acted as the reference to define
them.
Stemming from modernity are notions such as the traditional, the folk, the backward, the
classic, the pre-modern and the post-modern. It accompanies the building up of nation
states and imposes a vision of society and humanity as well as a set of values. As such, it
has driven societal choices but has also been the object of critique and questioning from
the 19th to the 21st century.
Modernity will be looked at both as a phenomenon and as a notion through multiples
angles and perspectives with lectures by faculty from Sociology, Literature, History and
Fine Arts departments.
How does one locate him/herself in regard to modernity? Have humans defined
themselves as master of their own destiny only in the modern period? Has modernity
allowed humans to achieve their goals to free themselves from the bounds of beliefs? The
notion won’t be looked at as only a western and recent concept. Other historical and
cultural influences constitutive of modernity will also be considered. (3:1:0)
ECO 108: Logic and Scientific Reasoning
This is an introduction to mathematical logic and scientific methods that provides an
7
The prerequisites and the elective courses are revised from time to time. Please contact the
department UG Adviser for further information.
9
analytical foundation. The course begins with an introduction to elements of logic and
deductive method and will mostly emphasize on theory of sentential calculus, identity,
relations and deductive methods. Finally, applications of logic are presented towards a
construction of mathematical theory. (3:1:0)
MAT 101: Calculus I
This course covers one variable calculus and applications. It forms the base for subsequent
courses in advanced vector calculus and real analysis as well as for applications in
probability, differential equations, optimization, etc. One of the themes of the course is to
bring more rigour to the formulas and techniques students may have learned in school.
(3:1:0)
This course is a pre-requisite for: ECO 221, ECO 301
ECO 113: Introduction to Probability8
This course is designed to simply but rigorously introduce students to the set theoretic
basics of probability theory. It then goes on to the idea of random variables and probability
densities and distributions. It covers the most important probability densities and
distributions as well as mathematical expectation and functions of random variables. The
course concludes with the basics of estimation and hypothesis testing. This course sets the
foundation for the students to take up courses on Statistics and Econometrics later on.
(3:1:0)
This course is a prerequisite for: ECO203
MAT 283: Introduction to Statistics9
This course introduces you to a range of techniques in Statistics for understanding
randomness and variability, and for understanding relationships between quantities. This
course is a prerequisite for later courses in Statistics, Stochastic Processes and
Mathematical Finance. (3:1:0)
This course is a pre-requisite for: ECO 203
CSD 101/MAT 110: Introduction to Computing and Programming/Computing:
This course aims to empower the students in data abstraction, algorithm design and
performance estimation. In the process they shall learn the art of programming – a pretty
useful skill to have! Programming in C and Matlab will be taught. (3:0:1)
ECONOMICS CORE COURSES
ECO 101: Principles of Microeconomics10
This course is an introductory undergraduate course that teaches the fundamentals of
microeconomics. It is designed to provide a foundation for economic analysis and a broad
understanding of the economic issues at micro level. This course begins with a discussion
of supply and demand and the basic forces that determine an equilibrium in a market
economy. Next, it introduces a framework for learning about consumer behavior and
analyzing consumer decisions. We then turn our attention to firms and their decisions
8
DOM 104/DOM 105 cannot be taken if a student takes this course. In the future, this course may be
offered by the Mathematics department in the future. Please contact the department’s UG Student
Adviser for updated information on this.
9
Please contact the department’s UG Student Adviser for updated information on this course.
10 This course cannot be taken if a student takes MEC 103 and vice versa.
10
about optimal production, and the impact of different market structures on firms’
behavior. The final section of the course provides an introduction to some of the more
advanced topics like the notion of efficiency and optimality from a society’s point of view
and a brief discussion of welfare theorems. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: None
This course is a pre-requisite for: ECO 102, ECO 203, ECO 241, ECO 301, ECO
422
ECO 102: Principles of Macroeconomics11
This course introduces the main theories explaining the aggregate (or macro) behaviour of
the economy. The course starts by discussing how key macro variables are measured before
turning to theories that explain the behaviour of the economy in the short and long run.
Using this foundation, we discuss the main tools of macroeconomic policy (monetary and
fiscal policy) and their role in stabilising the economy. We conclude by exploring the uses
of macro policy in economies with international trade and turbulent financial markets.
(3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 101/MEC 103
This course is a pre-requisite for: ECO 243, ECO 302, ECO 304
ECO 203: Introductory Econometrics
This course introduces the basics of the practice of modern econometric techniques. A
detailed discussion of the linear regression model will be presented. The topics included in
the course are: the simple regression model, multiple regression models, classical
assumptions about disturbances, hypothesis testing, violation of classical assumptions,
multicollinearity, heteroskedasticity, omitted variable bias, functional forms, dummy
variables, outliers, goodness of fit and instrumental variables. To complete some
assignments and the project the students will also be introduced to STATA, statistical
analysis software. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 101/MEC 103, MAT 283
This course is a pre-requisite for: ECO 303, ECO 314, ECO 367, ECO 375, ECO
402, ECO 403, ECO 414, ECO 415, ECO 424
ECO 213: Basic Data Analysis and Econometrics
This course is a core course open only to Economics Minor students and is a substitute to
ECO203. For Minor students, credits from either ECO203 or ECO213, and not both, will
be counted towards their Minor credits. This course is meant to familiarize students with
the data-handling techniques used in Economics discipline and covers preliminary
concepts of statistics like random variables, probability distributions, estimation and
hypothesis testing; and goes on to introduce the students to basic regression analyses.
(3:1:0)
Prerequisites for this course: ECO 101/MEC 103, MAT 184/MAT 205/
MAT 283/CSD 209
This course is a pre-requisite for: ECO 303, ECO 314, ECO 367, ECO 375, ECO
414, ECO 415, ECO 402, ECO 424
ECO 221: Game Theory12
This course is an introduction to non-cooperative game theory – static and dynamic games
of complete and incomplete information. The aim of the course is to provide students
11 This course cannot be taken if a student takes MEC 104 and vice versa.
12 This course cannot be taken if a student takes MEC 201 and vice versa.
11
with a critical understanding of the scenarios wherein the tools and techniques of game
theory may be used. We will study the basic concepts of Nash Equilibrium, Correlated
Equilibrium, Dominance & rationalizability, Sub Game perfection and Bayesian
Equilibrium. Practical applications of these concepts will be studied in the context of
repeated games, bargaining and auction problems, signaling and cheap talk games. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: MAT 101/Equivalent (MAT 020/MAT 103)
This course is a pre-requisite for: ECO 431
ECO 301: Intermediate Microeconomics
This course is intended to provide advanced tools and techniques in the spheres of
consumer theory, markets, and general equilibrium and builds on the introductory
microeconomics course ECO 101. Students will be rigorously taught how consumers
maximize their preferences given their budgets to make optimal consumption decisions,
which in turn are aggregated to form the industry demand. Again, firms choose technology
and employ resources optimally to minimize costs, which give rise to the industry supply
function. The industry demand and supply then interact in the context of different market
structures (perfect competition, monopoly, oligopoly, etc.) to determine market price and
quantity in equilibrium, which give rise to consumer and producer surplus. The
government may impose taxes or provide subsidies to alter these surpluses. Finally, general
equilibrium analysis is invoked to analyse the behavior of multiple markets at the same
time, and how a change in one affects the other. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 101/MEC 103, MAT 101/Equivalent (MAT
020/MAT 103)
This course is a pre-requisite for: ECO 302, ECO 327, ECO 385, ECO 354, ECO
367, ECO 401, ECO 402, ECO 411, ECO 415, ECO 424, ECO 431
ECO 302: Intermediate Macroeconomics
This course is a continuation of the concepts introduced in the introductory
macroeconomics course ECO 102 and discusses the facts and theories about the
determination of per capita income and its differences across countries and across time.
In particular, it includes the study of economic fluctuations in output and employment and
the role of government in influencing these aggregate variables through its monetary and
fiscal policies. A range of macroeconomic problems are analyzed from government
finances in the intermediate run to economic stability in the short run. The course equips
the students to use tools of macroeconomics to study various macroeconomic models and
macroeconomic policies in-depth. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 102/MEC 104, ECO 301
This course is a pre-requisite for: ECO 402, ECO 422, ECO 437, ECO 461, ECO
462, ECO 492
ECO 401: Advanced Microeconomics
The course will build on the previous course in the Microeconomics sequence (ECO 301:
Intermediate Microeconomics). The main focus will be on developing an understanding
of when markets function efficiently and when they do not. The course begins by an
introduction to the general equilibrium framework with the aim of developing the concepts
of competitive equilibrium, and welfare theorems. This welfare theorems highlight how
the concerns of efficiency and distribution can be viewed as distinct issues with in a
competitive market economy framework. This will be followed by an analysis of
externalitites and public goods -- these serve as canonical examples of situations where the
market outcome may not be efficient, and might call for some form of market intervention
and/or non-market mechanisms for allocation of resources. The course will equip students
12
to think deeply about functioning of markets, the conditions under which markets are
efficient, conditions under which they might not be efficient, and types of intervention
that may improve on market outcomes. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 301
ECO 415: Economic Development
This course aims to develop the foundation of development economics, using the concepts
from both the macro and microeconomics. It focuses on building an understanding of the
developing world, using basic knowledge in economic theory, econometric methods, and
demography. It starts with alternatives theories of development, and then overview of
developing countries, major trends in income, inequality, poverty, education, health and
nutrition, population, and the contemporary models of underdevelopment. The course will
help students to pursue Development Economics as a field in graduate or doctoral studies.
(3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 203/ECO 213, ECO 301
ECO 461: International Economics
This course is an introduction to the theory of international trade and trade policy. The
course also introduces the students to forex market and macroeconomic analyses of an
open economy. The issues discussed include gains from trade and their distribution;
analysis of protectionism; trade barriers; exchange rate determination; and interlinkages of
the domestic economy with rest of the world. By the end of the course the students should
be equipped with a deeper understanding of international economic exchanges and the
analytical frameworks with which to seek answers to the puzzles of our changing economic
times, especially in relation to the rest of the world. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 302
13
ECONOMICS ELECTIVES
Not all but a selection of electives is offered every year. Below is a list of courses offered
in the recent past.
ECO 241: History of Economic thought
This course will enhance the students understanding of the development and progression
of the discipline of economics. This course is structured around questions like: How have
different schools of thought in economics analyzed markets as the institution of resource
allocation? How have the views about the market and the state as two major institutions
of resource allocation changed over time. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 101/MEC 102
ECO 243: Law and Economics
Here we focus on the relationship of economic principles to law and the use of economic
analysis to study legal problems. Topics will include: property rights and intellectual
property; analysis of antitrust and of legal decision-making. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 102/MEC 104, MAT 101/Equivalent (MAT 020,
MAT 103)
ECO 303: Time Series and Forecasting
This course is intended to provide students with a good understanding of statistical,
graphical and numerical data analyses of time-series data. This course introduces the theory
and practice of time series analysis with an emphasis on practical skills. The course starts
with a review of the probability theory and OLS and then proceeds to time series topics
like serial correlation, univariate models, non-stationary models, structural breaks,
simultaneous equations models and vector autoregression models. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 203/ECO 213
This course is a pre-requisite for: ECO 403
ECO 304: Indian Economic History
This course is an attempt to understand how historical institutions shape present economic
outcomes but will focus on it from an Indian perspective. What have been the long-lasting
impacts of historical Indian institutions on economic outcomes? What did the nature of
the Indian economy look like two centuries ago? How did the experience under the British
Empire change Indian society and economy? We will look at theories dealing with the
persistence of the caste system, the effect of global events on the pre-independence Indian
politics, etc. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 102/MEC 104
ECO 314: Health Economics
This course introduces the students to the fundamentals of health economics and enables
them to examine the health sector and health policy from an economics perspective. The
course covers a wide range of topics such as the relationship between health and human
capital, impact of changes in the health status of the population on demographic changes,
linkages between health and overall economic development, demand for health services,
demand for health insurance, provision of healthcare and health insurance and health
policies in developing countries with special focus on India. The goal is to help students
to apply economic concepts and tools to the fields of health economics. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 203/ECO 213
14
ECO 327: Introductory Financial Economics
This course introduces students to the economics of finance with special emphasis on asset
pricing and the valuation of risky cash flows. Some of the basic models used to benchmark
valuation of assets and derivatives are studied in detail. Details of consumer decision-
making under uncertainty is studied; using that general framework as a basis for
understanding theories of securities pricing, including the capital asset pricing model
(CAPM) and the arbitrage pricing theory (APT). The course highlights fundamentals of
the theory of finance with examples from financial markets in India. It ends with
international corporate finance. Students are expected to be familiar with statistics and
probability theory in order to take this course. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 301
ECO 335: Introductory Environmental Economics
This course provides a comprehensive coverage of introductory level environmental
economics and covers key relevant concepts such as sustainability, environmental
valuation, market failure and public goods, and uses them to frame and analyse
contemporary environmental challenges faced by our societies. The course equips
participants with an ability to engage in multi-disciplinary teams; analyse environmental
and economic policy issues; and understand the nature of trade-offs arising between
environmental conservation and economic development goals. Examples of topics
covered include – cost-benefit analysis; environmental valuation methods; market failure,
externalities and public goods; economics of climate change management; trade and the
environment; hysteresis and resilience; taxes versus quotas; renewable and non-renewable
resource management; economics of urban planning in the context of environmental
challenges and urban sprawl; and managing irreversible and catastrophic events. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 203, ECO 301
ECO 354: Public Economics
This is an introductory public economics course that focuses on role of government in the
economy. It is designed to provide a basic understanding of reasons of government
intervention, the benefits of such policies and the consequent response of the economic
agents. The course begins with the scope of government intervention in case of market
failure, and then covers various forms of intervention from taxation, redistribution to
provision of public goods. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 301
ECO 367: International Finance
The course is divided into two modules. The first module contains the theory of
determination of exchange rates. The underlying causes of exchange rate fluctuations are
analysed in detail using the theoretical macroeconomic models. The second half of the first
module starts with how central banks regulate exchange rates. Effectiveness of
government policies are studied under the fixed exchange rate vis-a-vis flexible exchange
rate regime. Transition from the fixed to the flexible/partially flexible exchange rate system
is studied in detail. The second module consists of time series econometrics and its
application in what is taught in the first module. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 203/ECO 213, ECO 301
ECO 374: Behavioural Economics
This is an introductory course on behavioural economics where we examine the prediction
power of economic theory and game theory in the real world with more emphasis on very
recent empirical content. We look at why (and by how much) human behaviour
15
consistently deviates from the predictions of theory and how such understanding can be
useful to refine our models aimed at predicting human behaviour. (3:1:0)
Prerequisites for this course: ECO 221, ECO 301
ECO 375: Labour Economics
This course is an introduction to labour economics with an emphasis on applied
microeconomics and empirical analysis. The purpose is to inform students of topics like
labour supply, labour demand, labour market institutions and public policies affecting
labour markets, immigration, returns to human capital investment, labour market
discrimination and empirical analysis of wage and earning gaps. The recommended
statistical software for this course is STATA. The aim of the course is to introduce students
is to develop empirical skills of students, relevant not just for labour economics but applied
microeconomics in general. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 203/ECO 213
ECO 402: Advanced Macroeconomics
This course covers macroeconomic theory at an advanced level that falls between the 2nd
year basic intermediate macroeconomics (ECO 302) and graduate microeconomics. It
covers the behaviour of individual agents and builds from this foundation to a theory of
aggregate economic outcomes. (3:1:0)
Prerequisites for this course: ECO 203/ECO 213, ECO 302
ECO 403: Advanced Econometrics
This is an advanced undergraduate econometrics course for those who want to go deeper
into econometric theory and its applications, continuing with the concepts developed in
ECO 203. Topics covered will include instrumental variables, panel data methods,
difference-in-difference techniques, limited dependent variable methods and experimental
methods. Students will be required to be familiar with and use various econometric
software. After completing the course, the students should be able to handle large
microdata and work independently on empirical research projects. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 203
ECO 411: Contract Theory and Institutions:
This course is a bridge between undergraduate and graduate level microeconomics. The
first few lectures is devoted to some recapitulation of basic microeconomics, reminder of
the basic notion of competitive equilibrium, the various reasons why markets may fail in
achieving efficient outcomes - externalities, information problems, etc, a brief description
of the Coase Theorem and the power of decentralized solutions. The various sources of
transaction costs and different property rights regimes (private goods, public goods,
common property resources) and the problems that arise if property rights are not well
defined are discussed. The course concentrates on simple models of information
economics - both adverse selection and moral hazard – and then specific applied examples
are discussed. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 301
ECO 422: Money and Banking
This course gives an overview of banking systems and means of payment, and the
regulation thereof. The first half of the course concerns the historical development of
means of payment, and covers basic theories of money, credit, bond pricing, and term
structure. The second half discusses how central banks and regulatory bodies maintain
stability of financial markets, monetary value, exchange rates, and the macroeconomy in
16
general. International comparisons are highlighted. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 302
ECO 424: Economics of Politics
This course will introduce students to the economic (game theoretic) analysis of political
situations. We will then look at the interaction between economics and politics. In
particular, we study how politics and policy making affect economic outcomes (with an
exclusive focus on developing countries) and how economic developments in turn can
lead to substantive political changes. The course will use theoretical and econometric tools
developed in your previous economics courses. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 203/ ECO 213, ECO 301
ECO 431: Industrial Organization
The course aims to familiarize students with the various aspects of Industrial Organization.
IO like most disciplines in Economics is largely an empirical field. However, this course
will be mostly theoretical and descriptive in nature. The focus in this approach will be to
cover a large array of topics. The idea would be to equip students with the theoretical
background and motivation to ask the empirical questions about a significant range of
issues discussed in the discipline. The other aspect of the course will be to motivate
students to apply the theoretical concepts to market structures and firm strategies in the
Indian context. IO is a highly applied field but the data and motivation is mostly based on
the experiences of the US and Europe. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 221, ECO 301
ECO 437: Financial Economics and Asset Pricing
An introductory course on asset pricing that will introduce various financial assets and its
pricing mechanism. Beginning with mean variance models, the course will move to
arbitrage pricing theory. Aspects of commodity market, including hedging, arbitrage and
speculation will also be presented in case of various financial assets/instruments. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 302
ECO 462: Global Economy
Global economy has transformed rapidly in the last few decades and global economic
integration has taken giant strides. Economic growth and crisis has been important part of
the economic narrative in the evolution of the global economy. This course provides an
understanding of the factors behind the growth experienced by countries and why some
countries have grown faster than others. Economic and financial crises has also been a
recurrent part of the global economy. This course would provide a sound understanding
of the different types of crises and the factors responsible for them. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 302
ECO483: Basics of Survey Design
This unit deals with the design of surveys and analyzing survey data for applied research
in social sciences. The emphasis of this unit is on providing a hands-on experience in
survey design to undergraduates. The unit will have an applied focus where students will
be expected to design and conduct surveys and analyze data using statistical methodology.
At the end of the coursework, it is expected that students would have acquired the ability
to address socio-economic research questions through rigorous fieldwork-based data
analysis. This course is suitable for beginning level researchers who are interested in
applying survey tools and methods for data analysis.
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 203/ECO 213
17
ECO 485: Topics in Environmental Economics
This course deal with issues related to third world environmental problem. It will show of
issues of development and environment is inextricably related to each other in a third
world context. We will cover topics like CPR theory, Poverty and Environment, Gender
and Environment and the Political Economy of Environmental Policy. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 385
ECO 492: Topics in Macroeconomics
This course concentrates on the fundamentals of modern macroeconomic modelling and
applications for forecasting and policy analysis. Attention will focus on representing such
macroeconomic phenomena as inflation, unemployment, the business cycle, productivity,
and secular growth. Students will build a macro model. Topics will include how to simulate
a range of fiscal and monetary policies and how to measure their effectiveness for
stabilization and growth. (3:1:0)
Pre-requisites for this course: ECO 302
18
ECONOMICS UWEs AND CCCs
Most of the core and elective, but not general, courses in Economics (with ECO prefix
in the course code) are offered as University-Wide-Electives.
The department has offered the following course(s) as a Co-Curricular-Course.
CCC 651: Global Economy This course will introduce students to basic concepts of
economics, including the historical developments that gave rise to the capitalist economic
mode, the tools used to help understand economic phenomena, and how economics
addresses policy questions, particularly in the context of globalization. (2:0:0)
19