DEPARTMENT OF
ECONOMICS
ANALYTICAL THINKING, PHYSICAL AND
CREATIVITY, PROBLEM-SOLVING: EMOTIONAL WELL-BEING:
Why Shiv Nadar University?
With research programs, internships, A vibrant campus life on our
entrepreneurial opportunities, and more, 286-acre green campus is
our curriculum teaches key skills. designed just for that.
Shiv Nadar University is a multidisciplinary research university
established in 2011 by Mr. Shiv Nadar, one of Asia's foremost
philanthropists and a pioneer of the technological revolution in
JOBS, HIGHER STUDIES
India. The four Schools at the university offer undergraduate,
OR START-UPS:
postgraduate, and doctoral degrees in Engineering, Natural ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE:
Sciences, Humanities and Social Sciences, and Management Our faculty come from We prepare our students
and Entrepreneurship. It is the youngest university recognised top institutions in India for a variety of aspirations.
as an Institution of Eminence by the Government of India, a and the world.
distinct category of higher education institutions that "strive to
become the top hundred Institutions in the world over time".
In the Government's National Institutional Ranking Framework
(NIRF), the university has been the youngest institution in the Why
'Top 100' Overall list for the last five years. Shiv Nadar
Institution of
Eminence?
Why Study Economics at
Shiv Nadar University?
The Department of Economics is committed to students write an undergraduate thesis. There
producing leaders for the 21st century who will are ample opportunities for students to take up
push the boundaries of what is deemed possible summer internships to gain industry experience.
and enlarge the visions of a just society through The programs are student-centric, and faculty
their work. encourage students to think critically, be
analytical, and ask questions to develop an
Our undergraduate and postgraduate programs independent mindset.
in economics are premised on building critical
faculties and fostering independent thinking. They help in fostering not just a career but also
Our four-year undergraduate program provides personal growth of the individual self. The
a holistic education in economic theory and department has a close-knit alumni network
quantitative economics. The program has a and endeavours to continue helping students
research focus, where among other things, become leaders of tomorrow.
Curriculum
B.Sc. (Research) in Economics Program Structure Major courses, each student must have at least 96
credits in Economics obtained throughout the
Economics training at the university aims to provide
undergraduate program. This includes three courses
A unique and state-of-the-art curriculum promises an
students with a thorough understanding of the core
(i.e., Academic Writing, Logic and Scientific Reason-
exciting learning experience for all students. The
areas of economics, followed by instruction in subfields
ing, and Modernity: A Critical Exploration) that are
foundational pillars of the program are its faculty, who are
of the student's choosing in the final years. Students
necessary for all students enrolled in the School of
recognised researchers in their respective fields. To the
must complete an undergraduate thesis project as part
Humanities and Social Sciences (SHSS) undergradu-
extent possible, courses include independent research
of the program. They can choose from a wide range of
ate programs. In addition, students must take one
components such as term papers and presentations. This
subfields including, but not limited to, game theory and
course each on Calculus, Probability, Statistics, and
degree is designed to be comparable to internationally
industrial organisation, development economics,
Computer Programming. They must complete all
acclaimed programs and combines rigorous training with
political economy, public economics, environmental
requirements for a degree in a minimum of three
flexibility in choosing elective courses. The aim is to produce
economics, macroeconomics, international trade, labour
years and a maximum of six years. Nearly all students
students ready for market opportunities, be it jobs in the
economics, and money and banking, among others.
complete the degree in four years.
corporate sector, public sector, non-governmental/social
sector, or a desire to pursue higher studies in economics or To graduate with a Major in Economics, each student
related disciplines. The program is holistic as evidenced by requires at least 108 credits in Major courses and 42
the course structure, which includes subjects like academic credits in university-wide electives (UWE) and
writing, probability, and statistics. common-core-curriculum (CCC) courses. Among the
Major in Economics | Suggested Semester-wise Schedule
1st YEAR 2nd YEAR
Semester 1 Semester 2 Semester 3 Semester 4
Academic Writing Modernity: An Interdisciplinary Game Theory Advanced Microeconomics
Logic and Scientific Reasoning Exploration Intermediate Macroeconomics International Economics
Principles of Microeconomics Principles of Macroeconomics University-wide electives (UWE) Introductory Econometrics
Calculus I Intermediate Microeconomics credits – 4
Introduction to Computer Programming*
Common-core-curriculum (CCC) Calculus II Common-core-curriculum (CCC)
University-wide electives (UWE) credits – 4
credits – 3 Common-core-curriculum (CCC) credits – 3
Common-core-curriculum (CCC) credits – 3
credits – 3 Introduction to Probability
3rd YEAR 4th YEAR
Semester 5 Semester 6 Semester 7 Semester 8
Development Economics Departmental Elective IV Research Project (4 credits) Research Project (8 credits)
Departmental Elective I Departmental Elective V Departmental Elective VII Departmental Elective VIII
Departmental Elective II Departmental Elective VI University-wide electives (UWE)
Departmental Elective III University-wide electives (UWE) credits – 4
University-wide electives credits – 4 credits – 4
Common-core-curriculum (CCC) Common-core-curriculum (CCC) *This course is currently offered by the Mathematics Department as
credits – 3 credits – 3 MAT110 and by the Computer Science Department as CSD101.
B.Sc. (Research) in
Economics and Finance Program Structure
To graduate with a Major in Economics and Finance, Finance courses (24 credits cumulatively). A student must
The department successfully launched a new B.Sc.
each student must obtain at least 155 credits, of which gain at least six credits each in elective courses offered by
(Research) program in Economics and Finance in the
at least 113 credits must be obtained from the Major the Department of Economics and the Department of
academic year 2020-21. This program is an excellent
courses and 42 credits must be gained from the Finance, Accounting and Control.
example of the interdisciplinary ethos of Shiv Nadar
university-wide electives (UWE) and common- The program culminates with a semester-long internship
University. It has been jointly developed and conducted
core-curriculum (CCC) courses. The 113 credits that (scheduled in the eighth semester, carrying 12 credits).
by the Department of Economics under the School of
must be obtained from the Major courses include Students may opt for a research thesis instead of the
Humanities and Social Sciences (SHSS), and the
compulsory core courses (77 credits), elective courses in internship, subject to a mutual agreement between them
Department of Finance, Accounting and Control under
Economics and Finance (24 credits), and one and their faculty thesis advisor. The student must acquire
the School of Management and Entrepreneurship (SME).
semester-long internship (12 credits). Compulsory at least 42 credits from university-wide electives (UWE)
The curriculum has been expressly designed keeping in
courses are split between Economics and Finance core and common-core-curriculum (CCC) courses. Students are
mind the increasing need and relevance for knowledge of
courses (54 credits cumulatively), Academic Writing (4 encouraged to develop technological expertise through
both economics and finance that equips students with a
credits, offered by the Department of English), Calculus, departmental and university-wide-electives. A student
broad and deep understanding of the connections
Probability, Statistics, and Computer Programming (16 must complete all requirements for a degree in a minimum
between the structure and working of the economy with
credits cumulatively, offered by the Department of of three years and a maximum of six years.
the functioning of markets and institutions in general,
Mathematics), and a Research Seminar (3 credits).
and financial markets and financial institutions in
Elective courses are split between Economics and
particular.
Major in Economics and Finance | Suggested Semester-wise Schedule
The following is a list of recent undergraduate
1st YEAR 2nd YEAR elective courses offered by the department:
Semester 1 Semester 2 Semester 3 Semester 4 Industrial Organisation
Introduction to Financial Accounting – 3 credits Managerial Accounting – 3 credits Corporate Finance– 4 credits Investment Analysis and Portfolio Public Economics
Principles of Microeconomics – 4 credits Principles of Macroeconomics – 4 credits Game Theory – 4 credits Management (IAPM) – 3 credits International Trade
Academic Writing – 4 credits Intermediate Microeconomics – 4 credits Intermediate Macroeconomics – 4 credits Introductory Econometrics – 4 credits Environmental Economics
Logic and Scientific Methods– 4 credits Calculus II – 4 credits Introduction to Computing – 4 credits Departmental Elective I – 3 credits Growth and Fluctuations
Calculus I – 4 credits University-wide electives (UWE) + Introduction to Probability– 4 credits Financial Markets and Institutions – 3 Behavioral Economics
University-wide electives (UWE) + Common-core-curriculum (CCC) credits – 6 University-wide electives (UWE) + credits Economics of Discrimination
Common-core-curriculum (CCC) credits – 1.5 Common-core-curriculum (CCC) credits – 1.5 University-wide electives (UWE) + Labour Market Macroeconomics
Common-core-curriculum (CCC) credits – 7
Multinational Corporations
3rd YEAR 4th YEAR
Financial Econometrics
Semester 5 Semester 6 Semester 7 Semester 8 International Finance
Money & Banking
Options, Futures and Derivatives – 3 credits FinTech – 3 credits Departmental Elective V – 3 credits Internship/RA (6 Months) – 12 credits
Development Economics
Financial Econometrics – 4 credits Departmental Elective III – 4 credits Departmental Elective VI – 3 credits
Labour Economics
Departmental Elective II – 4 credits Departmental Elective IV – 4 credits Departmental Elective VII – 3 credits
Poverty and Inequality
University-wide electives (UWE) + University-wide electives (UWE) + Research Seminar – 3 credits
Advanced Econometrics
Common-core-curriculum (CCC) credits – 8 Common-core-curriculum (CCC) credits – 9 University-wide electives (UWE) +
Basics of Survey Design
Common-core-curriculum (CCC)
credits – 9
B.Sc. Placements
Corporate Placements: WNS, Bloomberg, D.E. Shaw,
Mckinsey, Atlan, The Hindu, Galytix, Outlook Management
Group, Signzy, MasterG, TapIn (Startup Founder), IDinsight, The
Smart Cube, and Futures First.
Academic Placements: Indian School of Business; Duke
University - The Fuqua School of Business; Columbia University;
London School of Economics; ICFAI Business School (Hyderabad
Campus); SDA Bocconi Asia Centre; University of Oxford;
University of Alberta; University of Washington; IIM Ahmedabad;
Le cordon bleu (Australia); Toulouse School of Economics;
Stockholm School of Economics; National University of Singapore
(pursuing Ph.D. in Public Policy); IHEID (Geneva); Madras School
of Economics; Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence; University of
Rochester (pursuing Ph.D. Economics); and University of
Warwick.
The first-year coursework consists of seven compulsory
M.Sc. Economics The following is the list of elective courses offered by the
courses, one elective, and one non-credit course:
department in recent years:
The two-year master's program in economics promises Semester I Semester II Semester III Semester IV
to provide students with training within a nurturing (Monsoon Semester) (Spring Semester) (Monsoon Semester) (Spring Semester)
environment supported by faculty members working at
Microeconomics Microeconomics II Industrial Organisation International Finance
the forefront of research in their respective fields. The Macroeconomics Macroeconomics II Public Economics Time Series Analysis
curriculum imparts a theoretical foundation with a Mathematical Methods Econometrics I International Trade Social Choice Theory
strong emphasis on real-world application, resulting in a Statistics Elective I Environmental Economics Labour Economics
Growth and Inequality Game Theory
solid grounding in quantitative methods and Coding (non-credit)
Individual and Collective Choice Behavioral Economics
econometrics. Contract Theory Financial Economics
Matching and Fair Division Topics in International Trade
The second year (Semester III and Semester IV) involves Computational Economics Development Economics
Program Structure one compulsory course and seven elective courses: Open Economy MacroEconomics Workshop
Macroeconomics Political Economy Workshop
To complete the master's program, students are required International Trade Politics and Institutions
to finish a total of 16 courses. Of these, eight courses Semester III Semester IV Independent Research Project Economics of Discrimination
are compulsory, and the remaining eight are electives. (Monsoon Semester) (Spring Semester) MicroEconomics Workshop
Advanced Macroeconomics
Additionally, in the first year, students must undertake a Econometrics II Elective V
Elective II Elective VI In semesters III and IV, students may opt for a research-based course (Independent
non-credit course on Coding. It is also essential that the Research Project) in lieu of a taught course, spread over two semesters, where they
Elective III Elective VII
students meet all university requirements. work under the supervision of a faculty member to develop a master's thesis.
Elective IV Elective VIII
Note: The course structure is subject to change with approval from the university's
academic council.
M.Sc. Placements
Ph.D. in Economics
Corporate Placements: PricewaterhouseCoopers,
Ph.D. Placements
The doctoral program involves eight internal economics
Deloitte, KPMG, Apollo Global Management, Futures
courses in the first year covering micro, macro, econometrics
First, Genpact, Nagarro, Sunstone Eduversity, WNS,
Manglayatan University, GFK, Exceedence, Sattva and an elective. The courses enable students to develop Corporate Placements: Senior Auditor at
Consultancy, Centre for Digital Financial Inclusion, advanced technical skills and pursue research in an extensive American Express
array of subjects, including development economics,
Zigram, Galytix, Hive, and Centre for Analytical Finance
behavioural economics, environmental economics,
(ISB) Council On Energy, Environment and Water
macroeconomics, labour economics, economic growth, public Academic Placements: Senior Evaluation
(CEEW).
economics, game theory, network theory, gender economics, Specialist at International Initiative for Impact
industrial organisation, and political economy. Evaluation (3ie); Assistant Professor at the Indira
Academic Placements: Bocconi University; Deakin Gandhi Institute of Development Research, Mumbai;
University; Georgia State University; University of The students get several opportunities to explore various Assistant Professor at the Indian Institute of
Pittsburgh; University of California, Santa Barbara; research topics in their first year through seminars and Technology, Hyderabad, and Assistant Professor at
University of California, Riverside; Stony Brook workshops. With this insight, they can choose their specific UPES, Dehradun.
University; Tulane University; Purdue University; area of research.
University of Pennsylvania; Texas A&M University; Iowa
State University.
Department of Economics Faculty
Our faculty members have Ph.D.s from renowned institutions like Economic Journal. Several of our faculty regularly publish in
the University of Maryland, the University of Minnesota, national and local media like Times of India, Economic Times,
Pennsylvania State University, the University of British Columbia, Mint, Hindustan Times, Hindu Business Line, Telegraph,
Vanderbilt University, Indian Statistical Institute, Stony Brook Anandabazar Patrika, Indian Express, and Moneycontrol.
University, Maastricht University, University of Southern
Our professors have received prestigious awards and grants
California, University of California (Irvine), University of
from various national and international organisations. The most
Missouri-Columbia, Southern Methodist University, and Arizona recent being Best Paper Award in the Applied Economics category
State University. at the Econometric Society-Delhi School of Economics Winter School
Our faculty has been published in top international journals like 2023, M.J. Manohar Rao Award 2021, Honorary Fellow at Global
Oxford Economic Papers, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Labour Organisation, Non-Resident Fellow at the Center for
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, Economics Letters, Development Economics and Sustainability (CDES), Monash
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Applied Economics, University, and Marty Weinbaum Award.
Ecological Economics, Journal of Economic Behaviour and In addition, our faculty members have been awarded research
Organization, Journal of Development Studies, World Bank Economic grants from organisations such as the International Growth
Review, Economics of Education Review, Journal of Economic Theory, Centre (IGC), the Australian Centre for International Agricultural
PLOS ONE, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Journal of Research (ACIAR), Azim Premji Foundation, CSSR-Equipment,
Association of Environmental and Resource Economics, Games and Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, among
Economic Behaviour, Journal of Mathematical Economics, and others.
Academic Collaborations
The university has ongoing academic collaborations with several international universities, from which students of economics can benefit. For instance, the School of Humanities and Social
Sciences (SHSS) has a tie-up that allows students to visit the National Yunlin University of Science and Technology under an exchange program. A more detailed list of the existing
collaborations can be found below:
International Academic Collaborations
Partner Institution School / Department Scope of Collaboration
1. University of Michigan – Ann Arbor Humanities and Social Sciences Student Mobility, Joint research, Hosted the first joint faculty workshop in February 2018, Joint
Ph.D. supervision for Shiv Nadar IoE research scholars from School of Humanities and Social Sciences
2. Heidelberg University, Germany Humanities and Social Sciences Erasmus Program, Faculty and student mobility, Academic exchange
3. Ontario In’tl (Consortia of 9 Canadian Universities) All Student Mobility
4. Deakin University, Australia (MoU expired, Management & Economics Comprehensive Partnership involving joint research, Faculty and student mobility, Training
under renewal)
5. University of California, Berkeley All Student mobility; to organize a joint program on higher education leadership development in India
6. University of Bologna, Italy All University-wide partnership – includes Student mobility, Faculty mobility, Joint research, Teaching, etc.
7. University of Wisconsin-Madison All VISP - Visiting International Students Program (outbound mobility)
8. University of Essex All Students’ mobility and Joint research projects
9. University of Warwick Humanities and Social Sciences Student exchange program
10. National Yunlin University of Science and SHSS Student exchange program, Faculty exchange program, Short term academic
Technology, Taiwan program, Staff development projects and Joint Research
11. Tamkang University Economics Student exchange program
12. Mondragon University All Exchange of students, Exchange of academic and administrative staff, Joint research,
Industry exchange, Short programs, Participation in seminars and conferences
13. Gdansk University of Technology All Schools Student exchange, Research and Educational purposes
14. National Quemoy University All Schools Student exchange, maximum 5 students
Other Global Opportunities
1. NTU-India Research Internship All schools Summer/Semester research internship at NTU through University nominations
2. FRT Future Research Talent, Australian National All schools Semester research internship through nomination
University
3. MITACS and other opportunities in Canadian All schools Only SICI members can apply, and Shiv Nadar IoE is one of them (Shastri Indo Canadian
universities Institute)
4. GYSS Global Young Scientist Summit All schools Submit through University nominations
Pathway to Progress
Students have numerous opportunities after Many of them have pursued an M.A. and
completing their degree from Shiv Nadar Ph.D. in Economics from top international
University. In the past, our undergraduate universities such as Columbia University,
students have been placed in research-in- New York University, London School of
tensive organisations like J-PAL and big Economics, and Paris School of Economics,
corporations like DE Shaw, Deloitte, and among others. Some opt for a master's
McKinsey, among others. Students also get degree at reputed Indian institutes such as
placed in economics-related positions at the Delhi School of Economics, Indira Gandhi
media organisations like Bloomberg, The Institute of Developmental Research, among
Hindu, among others. others. A few also go for an MBA at the top
IIMs. By acquiring degrees from prestigious
However, a majority of our undergraduate institutions in India and abroad, our students
students prefer going for higher studies. are assuredly on the pathway to progress.
Student Outcomes
Over the years, the Economics Department has attracted a
talented cohort of undergraduate and graduate students.
Our graduates have secured admission to Ph.D. programs at
globally reputed institutions such as the University of
Pennsylvania, University of Pittsburgh, Purdue University,
Texas A&M, Iowa State University, UC Riverside, etc. Most
students opt for campus placement and get placed in
reputed organisations such as Deloitte, Futures First, and
Bank of America.
Admissions Eligibility
Eligibility for Undergraduate Programs
Program Selection Criteria Class 12th Eligibility
B.Sc. (Research)
SNUSAT Score
Economics Aggregate of best 4 academic
subjects in the marksheet must
B.Sc. (Research) Valid SAT (College Board) Score be >=65% (must include English
Economics & Mathematics)
and Finance Valid ACT Score
Eligibility for Master's Program
The minimum qualification for admission to the M.Sc. program is an
undergraduate degree (in any discipline) with 55% in aggregate.
Mathematics in Classes 10 and 12 is compulsory. Selection to the
master's program is based purely on the performance in the admission
test conducted by the department.
Eligibility for Doctoral Program
Prospective candidates must have obtained at least 55% in aggregate
in a postgraduate degree in any discipline. Candidates will be selected
based on their performance in the admission process (subject to the
minimum eligibility criteria being met).
Applicants who are shortlisted following the first stage of the
screening process are further interviewed before final selection.
Contact Details
Ms. Sapna Sharma Mailing Address
Program Manager Department of Economics,
+91-120-7170100 Ext. 6619 P.O. Shiv Nadar University
sapna.sharma@snu.edu.in Greater Noida
Pin: 201314
Mr Siddharth Kumar
Scan Here For More Details:
Senior Administrative Assistant
+91-120-7170100 Ext. 463
siddharth.kumar@snu.edu.in
Shiv Nadar University
NH 91, Tehsil Dadri, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh - 201314, India
Ph: +91-120-7170100, +91-120-2662002