
DEPARTMENT CURRICULUM AND
JOB OPPORTUNITIES:
■ The Department of Chemical Engineering offers a
comprehensive eight-semester curriculum.
■ The curriculum requires a minimum of 160 credits and
includes basic and engineering sciences, core courses,
and electives.
■ The Department of Chemical Engineering offers a range ALUMNI ACCOLADES:
of elective courses that cover various domains of the
■ The Department of Chemical Engineering has a
chemical industry. These include courses in petroleum
track record of producing successful alumni.
engineering, paint formulation, energy, and biochemical
engineering, among others. In addition, students can ■ Past students have achieved prominent positions
choose to study computational fluid dynamics, modeling, in various industries, including chemical manu­
and simulation, and other advanced topics that provide facturing, biotechnology, and academia.
them with the skills and knowledge needed to tackle ■ Of a total of 67 graduates, 49 (73.13%) have se­
complex engineering challenges. cured employment in various industries.
■ Students can tailor their academic journey to their ■ 14 (20.59%) graduates have gone on to pursue
individual interests and career aspirations through higher studies.
elective courses.
■ Three graduates (4.48%) are currently preparing
■ Minor and major projects in the final year focus on the for their next steps.
latest research avenues and offer hands-on experience.
■ A graduate (1.5%) has started successful entre­
■ The department encourages students to explore new preneurial venture.
avenues that push the boundaries of the field.
■ The department's alumni accolades highlight the
■ The curriculum prepares students for successful careers quality of education provided and the range of
in the field of chemical engineering. career opportunities available to graduates.
■ In addition, the Department of Chemical Engineering
STUDENT PLACEMENT AND HIGHER
provides students with ample opportunities to engage
with industry partners through research projects, EDUCATION RECORDS:
internships, and collaborations. These experiences not
only provide valuable hands-on experience, but also help ■ Graduates of the Department of Chemical Engi­
neering have secured placements in prominent
students establish valuable connections in the industry,
companies such as Deloitte, Uflex Chemicals, and
increasing their job prospects after graduation.
Capgemini.
DEPARTMENT RESEARCH FOCUS: ■ International companies like New Zealand Inter­
national Commercial Pilot Academy and Maersk
■ The Department of Chemical Engineering has four Supply Service have also recruited graduates of
thrust research areas: Bioenergy, Microreactors, the department.
Waste-to-wealth, and Polymers/soft matter.
■ Graduates also work in successful ventures, such
■ Research activities are supported by state-of-the-art as Trashnet, Katharos, Fabrik, and E-Squared LLP.
experimental and modeling/simulation facilities.
■ Graduates have pursued higher education in
■ Research focuses on sustainable energy production, prestigious institutions such as the Technical Uni­
microreactor development, waste utilization, and versity of Delft and New York University.
polymer/soft matter synthesis.
■ Renowned Indian institutes such as IIT BHU and
■ Researchers actively work towards addressing pressing IMT Ghaziabad have also enrolled graduates of
challenges in these areas. the department.
■ The department is committed to developing new ■ Other notable institutions include the Medizinische
technologies and techniques to advance these fields. Fakultat Mannheim der Universitat Heidelberg in
Germany, the Goa Institute of Management in India,
STUDENT CLUBS: and the Energy Institute in Bangalore.
■ Overall, the Department of Chemical Engineer­
■ The House of Habers is the sole student club in the
ing provides graduates with a wide range of
Department of Chemical Engineering.
placement opportunities and options for pursu­
■ It is dedicated to promoting environmental sustainability ing higher education.
through various awareness and education campaigns.
CONTACT DETAILS:
■ H 0 also organizes seminars and workshops featuring
2
experts in the field of chemical engineering, providing Dr. Sanjeev Yadav, Associate Professor
Head of Department of Chemical Engineering
opportunities for students to learn about the latest
Email: sanjeev.yadav@snu.edu.in
developments and innovations in the field.
Dr. Karan Gupta, Assistant Professor
■ The club plays an integral role in the student experience,
UG Advisor, Department of Chemical Engineering
providing opportunities for interaction with peers and
Email: karan.gupta@snu.edu.in
faculty, as well as making a positive impact on the
Dr. Yamini Sistla, Associate Professor
environment.
PG Advisor, Department of Chemical Engineering
Email: yamini.sistla@snu.edu.in