DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Prospectus (2024–2028)
Department of Electrical Engineering
Electrical and Computer Engineering
Program
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Department of Electrical Engineering
School of Engineering
UG Prospectus B.Tech. ECE with Specialization
I. Overview of Department of Electrical Engineering
The Electrical Engineering (EE) department is part of the School of Engineering (SoE) at SNIoE.
Its vision is to be a catalyst in imparting quality education and conducting valued research for the
benefit of society. Historically, the field of electrical engineering is one of the most important
engineering disciplines that have changed the course of the world. Some of our important areas of
teaching are electrical machines and drives, power electronics, power systems, integrated circuits
and systems, control systems, machine intelligence, communication systems and signal processing.
Sufficient emphasis is given to practical teaching and hands-on learning. Relevant laboratories have
been established to meet the requirements of teaching and research. The vision of the department is
to establish itself as a center of excellence in terms of research and teaching in its chosen areas. We
are committed to establishing human and material infrastructure towards this cause. The department
has formed research groups in some of the key areas and is in the process of collaborating with
various renowned institutions.
The undergraduate program is broad-based and founded on the pedagogy of learning by doing. The
postgraduate programs are getting formulated and are intended to provide advanced degrees in
contemporary areas of industrial relevance. They also provide platforms for research avenues. The
department has a vibrant doctoral research program. The doctoral program aims to conduct research
both in fundamental and applied areas for societal use. The programs intend to fill the dearth in the
supply of highly skilled professionals. It will also enable the students to gain high-end skills for
intellectually challenging careers in industry. Our aim is to invoke in our students a sense of
curiosity to question and to motivate them to think deeply about theoretical and applied problems
in technology for society’s needs.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Presently the EE department offers the following programs: -
Undergraduate Program:
Bachelor of Technology in Electrical and Computer Engineering (B. Tech. in ECE)
• with the option of doing minor in any other stream of interest.
• with the option of doing Specialization in any of the FOUR areas of interest.
Detailed rules and regulations regarding B. Tech. Program at SNIoE can be found in UG handbook
(available at: https://snulinks.snu.edu.in/snuPolicies/students/
Master Programs:
(I) M. Tech in RF and Microwave Engineering
(II) M. Tech in VLSI & Embedded Systems
Doctoral Programs:
(I) Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering / Electronics and Communication Engineering
Credit Break-up of UG Curriculum in Electrical and Computer
Engineering
Total number of Credits: 163
S. No. Category Credits
1 Core Common Curriculum (CCC) 18 42
2 University Wide Elective (UWE) 18
3 Basic Sciences (BS) 20
4 Engineering Sciences (ES) 13
5 Major Core 50
6 Major Elective 29
7 Minor Project 3
8 Major Project / Internship 6
Total Credits 163
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Detailed Break up Semester wise and Category wise
Engineering Science (ES)
S. Course Semester
Course Title L:T:P Credits
No. Code Offered
Basics of Electrical and
1 ECE101 3:1:1 5 1
Electronic Circuits
Introduction to Computing and
2 CSD101 3:0:1 4 1
Programming
3 CSD102 Data Structures 3:0:1 4 3
Basic Sciences (BS)
S. Course Semester
Course Title L:T:P Credits
No. Code Offered
1 MAT103 Mathematical Methods I 3-1-0 4 1
2 PHY101 Introduction to Physics I 3-1-0 4 1
3 MAT104 Mathematical Methods II 3-1-0 4 2
4 PHY102 3-1-1 5 2
Introduction to Physics II
Mathematical Methods III -
5 MAT205 3-0-0 3 3
Probability and Statistics
Major Core Courses
S. Course Semester
Course Title L:T:P Credits
No. Code Offered
1 ECE103 Digital Electronics 3:1:1 5 2
2 ECE102 Semiconductor Devices 3:0:0 3 2
Electric Machines & Power
3 ECE201 3-0-1 4 3
Systems
4 ECE203 Signals and Systems 3-1-0 4 3
5 ECE202 Embedded Systems Hardware 3-0-1 4 3
6 ECE205 Electromagnetic Engineering 3-1-0 4 4
7 ECE204 Analog Circuits 3-0-1 4 4
Power Electronics and Machine
8 ECE206 3-0-1 4 4
Drives
Principles of Communication
9 ECE207 3-0-1 4 4
Engineering
10 ECE301 Control Systems 3-0-1 4 5
11 ECE302 Digital Signal Processing 3-0-1 4 5
Computer Organization and
12 ECE303 3-0-0 3 5
Design
Artificial Intelligence and
13 ECE304 3-0-0 3 6
Machine Learning
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
S. Course Major Elective Courses L:T:P Credits Semester Specialization
No. Code Offered
1 ECE351 VLSI Design 3:0:1 4 5 Sensors and Nano-electronics
2 ECE352 Photovoltaic Power 3:0:0 3 5 Modern Energy Systems
Generation
3 ECE353 Microwave Engineering 3:0:0 3 5 Analog/RF and Communication
Engineering
4 ECE354 Sensor, Measurement, 3:0:1 4 5 1. Sensors and Nano-electronics
and Actuators 2. Modern Energy Systems
3. Embedded Systems and Computer
Engineering
5 ECE355 Scientific Computing 2:0:1 3 5 Miscellaneous
using MATLAB
6 ECE356 RF and Microwave 3:0:1 4 5 Analog/RF and Communication
Circuit Design Engineering
7 ECE357 Introduction to Robotics 3:0:1 4 5 Embedded Systems and Computer
Engineering
8 ECE363 Computer Communication 3:0:1 4 5 1. Analog/RF and
Networks Communication Engineering
2. Embedded Systems and Computer
Engineering
9 ECE370 Wireless Communications 3-0-0 3 5 Analog/RF and Communication
Engineering
10 ECE457 Information Theory and 3:0:0 3 5 Analog/RF and Communication
Coding Engineering
11 ECE360 IoT - Architecture, 2:0:1 3 6 Embedded Systems and Computer
Communication Engineering
Technology, and
Applications
12 ECE361 Power System Analysis 3:0:1 4 6 Modern Energy Systems
13 ECE362 Digital Communication 3:1:1 5 6 Analog/RF and Communication
Engineering
14 ECE365 Object Oriented 3:0:0 3 6 Miscellaneous
Programming
15 ECE366 Antenna Theory and 3:0:1 4 6 Analog/RF and Communication
Wave Propagation Engineering
16 ECE367 Digital Design with 3:0:1 4 6 1. Embedded Systems and Computer
FPGAs Engineering
2. Sensors and Nano-electronics
17 ECE368 Special Topics in 3:0:0 3 6 Analog/RF and Communication
Microwave Engineering Engineering
18 ECE371 Detection and 3-0-0 3 6 Analog/RF and Communication
Estimation Engineering
19 ECE372 Modern Control 3-1-0 4 6 1. Analog/RF and Communication
Systems Engineering
2. Modern Energy Systems
20 ECE373 Wireless Network 3-0-0 3 6 Analog/RF and Communication
Security Engineering
21 ECE374 Reconfigurable 3-0-0 3 6 Sensors and Nano-electronics
Computing
22 ECE375 Quantum Computing 3-1-0 4 6 1. Embedded Systems and Computer
Engineering
2. Analog/RF and Communication
Engineering
23 ECE451 Design of CMOS Analog 3:0:0 3 7 Sensors and Nano-electronics
Circuits
24 ECE452 Power System 3:0:0 3 7 Modern Energy Systems
Operation and Control
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
25 ECE453 Foundations of Deep 3:0:0 3 7 Miscellaneous
Learning
26 ECE454 Optical Fiber 3:0:1 4 7 Analog/RF and Communication
Communication Engineering
27 ECE455 Graph Signal Processing 3:0:1 4 7 Analog/RF and Communication
Engineering
28 ECE456 High Voltage 3:0:0 3 7 Modern Energy Systems
Engineering
29 ECE369 Information Theory 3:1:0 4 7 Analog/RF and Communication
Engineering
30 ECE458 Radar Communications 3:0:0 3 7 Analog/RF and Communication
Engineering
31 ECE459 Computational 3:0:0 3 7 Analog/RF and Communication
Electromagnetics Engineering
32 ECE460 Power System 3:0:0 3 8 Modern Energy Systems
Protection and
Switchgear
33 ECE461 HVDC Transmission 3:0:0 3 8 Modern Energy Systems
34 ECE462 WBG Devices for Power 3:0:0 3 8 1. Sensors and Nano-electronics
Circuits 2. Modern Energy Systems
35 ECE463 Satellite 3:0:0 3 8 Analog/RF and Communication
Communications Engineering
36 ECE464 Advance 3:0:0 3 8 Analog/RF and Communication
Electromagnetics Engineering
Engineering
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Semester-wise course break-up
First Semester
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CCC704 CCC704 (Environmental Studies) 4
2 MAT103 Mathematical Methods I 3-1-0 4
3 PHY101 Introduction to Physics I 3-1-0 4
4 ECE101 Basics of Electrical and Electronic Circuits 3-1-1 5
5 CSD101 Introduction to Computing and Programming 3-0-1 4
Semester Credits 21
Second Semester
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CCC 3
2 MAT104 Mathematical Methods II 3-1-0 4
3 PHY102 Introduction to Physics II 3-1-1 5
4 ECE103 Digital Electronics 3-1-1 5
5 ECE102 Semiconductor Devices 3-0-0 3
ECE101 Basics of Electrical and Electronic Circuits (non-ECE) 3-1-1 5
Semester Credits 20
Third Semester
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CCC 3
2 MAT205 Mathematical Methods III - Probability and Statistics 3-0-0 3
3 ECE201 Electric Machines & Power Systems 3-0-1 4
4 CSD102 Data Structures 3-0-1 4
5 ECE202 Embedded Systems Hardware 3-0-1 4
6 ECE203 Signals and Systems 3-1-0 4
ECE103 Digital Electronics (non-ECE) 3-1-1 5
Semester Credits 22
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Fourth Semester
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CCC 3
2 DES211 UWE (Creativity & Concept in Design) 3
3 ECE205 Electromagnetic Engineering 3-1-0 4
4 ECE204 Analog Circuits 3-0-1 4
5 ECE206 Power Electronics and Machine Drives 3-0-1 4
6 ECE207 Principles of Communication Engineering 3-0-1 4
Semester Credits 22
Fifth Semester
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 UWE 3
CCC 3
2 ECE301 Control Systems 3-0-1 4
3 ECE302 Digital Signal Processing 3-0-1 4
4 ECE303 Computer Organization and Design 3-0-0 3
5 Major Elective - 1 3
6 Major Elective - 2 3
Semester Credits 23
Major Elective Courses
ECE351 VLSI Design
ECE352 Photovoltaic Power Generation
ECE353 Microwave Engineering
ECE354 Sensor, Measurement, and Actuators
ECE355 Scientific Computing using MATLAB
ECE356 RF and Microwave Circuit Design
ECE357 Introduction to Robotics
ECE363 Computer Communication Networks
ECE457 Information Theory and Coding
ECE370 Wireless Communications
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Sixth Semester
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CCC 3
2 UWE 3
3 UWE 3
4 ECE304 Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning 3-0-0 3
5 Major Elective - 3 3
6 Major Elective - 4 4
7 Major Elective - 5 3
Semester Credits 22
Major Elective Courses
ECE360 IoT - Architecture, Communication Technology, and
Applications
ECE361 Power System Analysis
ECE362 Digital Communication
ECE365 Object Oriented Programming
ECE366 Antenna Theory and Wave Propagation
ECE367 Digital Design with FPGAs
ECE368 Special Topics in Microwave Engineering
ECE371 Detection and Estimation
ECE372 Modern Control Systems
ECE373 Wireless Network Security
ECE374 Reconfigurable Computing
ECE375 Quantum Computing
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Seventh Semester
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CCC 3
2 Major Elective - 6 3
3 Major Elective - 7 3
4 Major Elective - 8 4
5 UWE 3
6 UWE 3
7 ECE498 Minor Project 0-0-3 3
Semester Credits 22
Major Elective Courses
ECE451 Design of CMOS Analog Circuits
ECE452 Power System Operation and Control
ECE453 Foundations of Deep Learning
ECE454 Optical Fiber Communication
ECE455 Graph Signal Processing
ECE456 High Voltage Engineering
ECE369 Information Theory
ECE458 Radar Communications
ECE459 Computational Electromagnetics
Eighth Semester
S. No. Course Code Course Title L:T:P Credits
1 CCC/UWE (Online Course/Offline Course) 3
2 Major Elective (Online Course/Offline Course) -9 3
3 ECE499 Major Project 0-0-6 6
Semester Credits 12
Major Elective Courses
ECE460 Power System Protection and Switchgear
ECE461 HVDC Transmission
ECE462 WBG Devices for Power Circuits
ECE463 Satellite Communications
ECE464 Advance Electromagnetics Engineering
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Specialization
Requirement for Specialization Tracks: Student must earn a minimum of 16 Credits from a
particular specialization (out of required 16 credits, 3 credits may optionally be earned from
electives under "Miscellaneous" category). A student may choose to graduate without any
particular specialization.
The department of Electrical Engineering offers the following four specialization tracks in the ECE program:
• Modern Energy Systems
• Analog/RF and Communication Engineering
• Embedded Systems and Computer Engineering
• Sensors and Nano-electronics
Students may earn their specialization and get their B. Tech degree in Electrical and Computer
Engineering with specialization in “any of the four areas mentioned above”.
List of courses to earn specialization
S. Course Basket of courses for specialization Semester
L:T:P Credits
No. Code in 'Modern Energy Systems' Offered
1 ECE352 Photovoltaic/Renewable 3:0:0 3 5
2 ECE354 Sensor, Measurement, and Actuators 3:0:1 4 5
3 ECE361 Power System Analysis 3:0:1 4 6
4 ECE452 Power System Operation and Control 3:0:0 3 7
5 ECE456 High Voltage Engineering 3:0:0 3 7
6 ECE460 Power System Protection and 3:0:0 3 8
Switchgear
7 ECE461 HVDC Transmission 3:0:0 3 8
8 ECE462 WBG Devices for Power Circuits 3:0:0 3 8
9 ECE372 Modern Control Systems 3-1-0 4 6
S. Course Basket of courses for specialization in Semester
L:T:P Credits
No. Code 'Analog/RF and Communication Engineering' Offered
1 ECE453 Microwave Engineering 3:0:0 3 5
2 ECE356 RF and Microwave Circuit Design 3:0:1 4 5
3 ECE362 Digital Communication 3:1:1 5 6
4 ECE363 Computer Communication Networks 3:0:1 4 5
5 ECE370 Wireless Communications 3:0:0 3 5
6 ECE366 Antenna Theory and Wave Propagation 3:0:1 4 6
7 ECE368 Special Topics in Microwave Engineering 3:0:0 3 6
8 ECE454 Optical Fiber Communication 3:0:1 4 7
9 ECE455 Graph Signal Processing 3:0:1 4 7
10 ECE457 Information Theory and Coding 3:0:0 3 5
11 ECE458 Radar Communications 3:0:0 3 7
12 ECE459 Computational Electromagnetics 3:0:0 3 7
13 ECE463 Satellite Communications 3:0:0 3 8
14 ECE464 Advance Electromagnetics Engineering 3:0:0 3 8
15 ECE371 Detection and Estimation 3-0-0 3 6
16 ECE372 Modern Control Systems 3-1-0 4 6
17 ECE373 Wireless Network Security 3-0-0 3 6
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
18 ECE375 Quantum Computing 3-1-0 4 6
19 ECE369 Information Theory 3-1-0 4 7
Basket of courses for specialization in
S. Course Semester
'Embedded Systems and Computer L:T:P Credits
No. Code Offered
Engineering'
1 ECE357 Introduction to Robotics 3:0:1 4 5
2 ECE354 Sensor, Measurement, and Actuators 3:0:1 4 5
IoT - Architecture, Communication Technology,
3 ECE360 2:0:1 3 6
and Applications
4 ECE363 Computer Communication Networks 3:0:1 4 6
5 ECE367 Digital Design with FPGAs 3:0:1 4 6
6 ECE375 Quantum Computing 3-1-0 4 6
S. Course Basket of courses for specialization in Semester
L:T:P Credits
No. Code 'Sensors and Nano-electronics' Offered
1 ECE351 VLSI Design 3:0:1 4 5
2 ECE354 Sensor, Measurement, and Actuators 3:0:1 4 5
3 ECE367 Digital Design with FPGAs 3:0:1 4 6
4 ECE451 Design of Analog CMOS Circuits 3:0:0 3 7
5 ECE462 WBG Devices for Power Circuits 3:0:0 3 8
6 ECE374 Reconfigurable Computing 3-0-0 3 6
Syllabus of offered courses
ECE101: Basics of Electrical & Electronic Circuits
Unit Course Unit description Number of
Lecture
hours
Unit I: Basic Components of Electrical Circuits (4-5): Fundamental electrical 4-5
variables – charge, current, voltage & power; Independent Voltage &
Current sources; Ideal circuit elements - Resistor, Capacitor & Inductor;
Controlled Source models – VCVS, VCCS, CCVS & CCCS - definitions &
circuit models; Concepts of Linearity, Time-invariance & Passivity.
Unit II: Linear D-C Circuits: Kirchhoff’s laws, Series & Parallel combinations of 5-6
resistances, Voltage & Current divisions, Analysis of resistive circuits using
Loop & Node equations – with independent sources, and with both
independent and controlled sources.
Unit III: Time-domain Analysis of LTI Circuits: Natural & forced responses of basic 4-5
RC & RL circuits, Natural & forced responses of Series & Parallel RLC
circuits.
Unit IV: Sinusoidal Steady State Analysis of A-C Circuits: Notions of phasors, 6-7
impedance, admittance & transfer function; Frequency response vs
transient response; Responses of RC, RL & RLC circuits – series & parallel
Resonance; Simple passive Filters & their Bode plots; Loop & Node
Analysis of a-c circuits with independent & controlled sources.
Unit V: Useful Circuit Analysis Techniques: Superposition, Source transformations, 6-7
Thevenin’s equivalent, Norton’s equivalent, Maximum Power transfer,
Delta-wye conversions,
Unit VI: Basic Amplifiers: Amplifier parameters & controlled source models; VCVS 6-7
model of an Op-amp; Amplifiers using ideal OPAMP; Frequency response of
basic OPAMP-based amplifiers.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Unit VII: Waveform Generators: Condition of harmonic oscillation; RC and LC 5-6
oscillator circuits; Square wave generator using 555 Timer and Digital
inverters (TTL/CMOS).
Additional Topics (if time permits may be included with Lab. Experiments)
D-C Power Supply: Half-wave and Full-wave Rectifiers, Shunt Capacitor
filter, Voltage Regulator, Regulated D-C Power Supply.
Wave Shaping Circuits: Diode Clippers; Precision Clippers using Diode and
Op-amp; Diode Clamp; Peak Detector and Peak Hold circuits; Sample and
Hold circuit.
Recommended Text book(s)
1. Engineering Circuit Analysis – Hayt, Kemmerly & Durbin, Tata McGraw
Hill,
2. Electronic Devices and Circuit Theory by Robert L. Boylestad, Pearson
Publication.
Reference Text Books
1. Circuit theory and analysis by Robert L. Boylestad, Pearson publication.
2. The Art of Electronics – Horowitz & Hill, Cambridge University Press.
ECE102: SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES
UNIT COURSE UNIT DESCRIPTION NUMBER OF
LECTURE
HOURS
UNIT I: Basic Semiconductor Properties and band theory: Crystal Structure and 3
Systems, Miller Indices and notation for directions and planes, Concept of
holes, Energy bands, E-k diagrams, Band-structure, Conductivity effective
mass
UNIT II: Equilibrium Carrier Statistics: Density of states (DoS), Fermi function, 2
Equilibrium electron and hole concentrations
UNIT III: Recombination-Generation Processes: Recombination-generation 2
statistics, Low-level injection
UNIT IV: Carrier Transport: Drift current, Diffusion current, Continuity Equations, 3
Quasi-Fermi levels
UNIT V: Application of above-developed theory to devices: 28
- P-N junctions: 6 hours
- Metal Semiconductor devices: 1 hour
- MOS capacitors (MOSCAP): 3 hours
- Bipolar Junction Transistors (BJTs): 6 hours
- MOSFETs: 8 hours
- Power semiconductor devices like SCRs, Thyristors & Triacs, IGBTs and
Power MOSFETs: 4 hours
UNIT VI: Integrated Circuits: Brief introduction to how above semiconductor 1
devices are fabricated in an integrated circuit (IC)
RECOMMENDED TEXT BOOK(S)
1. Solid State Electronic Devices, Ben G. Streetman and Sanjay Banerjee;
Pearson Prentice Hall Publishers
REFERENCE TEXT BOOKS
1. Advanced Semiconductor Fundamentals, Volume VI of the Purdue Modular
Series on Solid State Devices, Robert F. Pierret; Pearson Prentice Hall
Publishers
2. Physics of Semiconductor Devices, S. M. Sze; John Wiley & Sons
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE103: DIGITAL ELECTRONICS
UNIT COURSE UNIT DESCRIPTION NUMBER OF
LECTURE
HOURS
UNIT I: Digital Processing of Information- Analog and Digital representations of 3
information; Information processing steps – logic and arithmetic; Range of
digital circuits and systems.
UNIT II: Number Systems and Arithmetic - Positional number systems – Binary, 6
Decimal, Octal, Hexadecimal; Signed number representations; Arithmetic
operations.
UNIT III: Digital Logic – Binary variables; Basic logic operations – AND, OR, NOT; 3
Basic gates; Essentials of Boolean algebra; De Morgan’s laws; Truth Table;
Boolean functions; Transforming a logical problem statement into a
Boolean expression.
UNIT IV: Combinational Circuit Design – Realisation of Boolean functions using 7
gates; Karnaugh map; Minimisation of Boolean functions; Multiplexer-
based realization of K-maps; Combinational circuit design using
multiplexers and gates.
UNIT V: Sequential Circuit Design – Latches and Flip-flops; Ripple counters; 11
Sequence generator using flip-flops; State Table and State Diagram;
Synchronous counters; Shift Registers; Ring and MLS counter, Introduction
to Memories.
UNIT VI: Hardware Description Language – VLSI digital design flow; Need for 9
HDL; Language reference manuals for Verilog – syntax and semantics;
Verification and synthesis of Verilog designs.
UNIT VII: Processor Architecture - Processor as a programmable digital system; 6
Basic constituents of a processor – Programmable ALU, Register array and
Program sequencer; A simple single-bus architecture and its Instruction Set.
RECOMMENDED TEXT BOOK(S)
1. M. Morris Mano and Ciletti M.D., “Digital Design”, 4th Edition, Prentice-
Hall 2006.
2. T.L. Floyd, “Digital Fundamentals”, 10th Edition, Pearson education,
2011.
REFERENCE TEXT BOOKS
i) R. P. Jain, “Modern Digital Electronics”, 3rd Edition, Tata McGraw
Hill, 2003.
ii) M. Morris Mano, “Digital Logic and Computer Design”, PHI, 2005.
iii) Taub and Schilling, “Digital Integrated Electronics”, McGraw Hill,
International Edition.
IV) A. P. Malvino and D.P. Leach, “Digital Principles and Applications”,
6th Edition, Tata McGraw-Hill, 2008
ECE201: ELECTRIC MACHINES AND POWER SYSTEMS
Transformers: Different types of transformers, Transformer Construction, Core and Shell type of
transformers, Core materials and laminated core, Cooling systems, Equivalent circuit of a
transformer, OC test, SC test, Voltage regulation and efficiency, Testing of transformers, Polarity test,
three-phase transformer connections, Auto-transformer, Applications.
DC Machines: Construction and working principle of DC motors and generators, commutation
process, armature reaction, types of dc motors and their operating characteristics, starters, speed
control of dc motors, losses and efficiency of dc motors, applications.
Three-phase Induction motors: Construction, rotating magnetic field, principle of operation of
three-phase Induction motors, equivalent circuit diagram, Torque-slip characteristics, no-load and
blocked rotor tests, starting of induction motor, speed control of induction motors, losses and
efficiency, applications.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
Single-phase Induction motors: Construction, Main and starting windings, starting methods, split
phase starting, capacitor split phase starting, torque-slip characteristics, applications.
Three-phase Synchronous machines and electric power generation: Construction, Types of
synchronous machines, Concepts of three-phase circuits, open-circuit and short-circuit
characteristics, synchronous reactance, voltage regulation of the alternators, active and reactive
power flow, synchronization process, two reaction theory of salient pole type synchronous
machines, power-angle characteristics, damper winding, types of power plants.
Modeling and analysis of transmission lines: Types of overhead lines, poles and towers,
Transmission line voltage levels in our country, conductors, resistance, inductance and capacitance
of transmission lines (without derivation), Short, Medium, and long transmission lines, T-and pi-
models of medium and long transmission lines, Voltage regulation, efficiency, active and reactive
power flow through a transmission line, Equations of long transmission line (without derivation),
Ferranti effect, Surge impedance loading. Corona phenomenon.
Overhead Line Insulators: Types of insulators, Potential distribution over a string of suspension
insulators, String efficiency, Methods of equalising the potential, grading rings, arcing horns.
Distribution System: Primary distribution and secondary distribution, overhead and underground
distribution, radial, ring main, interconnected distributions systems, voltage drop calculations, tap
changing transformers.
• Text Books:
1. D. P. Kothari and I. J. Nagrath, Electrical Machines. McGraw- Hill Higher Education, 4th
edition, 2010.
2. S. J. Chapman, Electric Machinery Fundamentals. McGraw-Hill, Inc. 5th edition, 2012.
3. P. S. Bhimbra, Electrical Machinery. Khanna publishers, 2012.
4. C. L. Wadhwa, Electrical Power Systems. New Age Publication, 6th edition, 2014.
• Reference Books:
1. Fitzgerald and Kingsley, Electrical Machinery. McGraw- Hill Higher Education, 7th
edition, 2013.
2. M. G. Say, The Performance and Design of Alternating Current Machines. CBS Publishers,
3rd Edition,
3. T. Gonen, Electric Power Transmission System Engineering: Analysis and Design. CRC
Press, Taylor and Francis Group, New York, 2009.
4. W. D. Stevenson Jr. and J. J. Grainger, Power System Analysis. McGraw Hill, 2017.
ECE202: EMBEDDED SYSTEMS HARDWARE
UNIT COURSE UNIT DESCRIPTION NUMBER OF
LECTURE
HOURS
UNIT I: Embedded system basics and microprocessors: 6
Introduction to the embedded system: i) components of embedded
system, ii) characteristics of embedded system, iii) challenges in embedded
system design, and iv) architecture of a general embedded systems
Microprocessor: i) introduction, ii) generations of microprocessors, iii)
classification of the microprocessor, iv) introduction to 8085
microprocessors, v) pinout and signals of 8085, vi) functional block diagram
of 8085, vii) addressing modes and interrupts in 8085, and viii) instruction
sets and programming in 8085.
UNIT II: 8-bit microcontrollers: 10
8051 microcontroller: i) features and introduction of 8051, ii) block
diagram and pinouts, iii) programming model, iv) Internal RAM
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
organization, v) interrupts, vi) C programming of 8051, and vii) interfacing
some important peripherals to 8051.
Arduino: i) introduction to Arduino (development board and IDE), ii)
programming to Arduino, and iii) interfacing some important peripherals to
Arduino.
UNIT III: 32-bit microcontrollers: 8
i) overview, ii) functional block diagram, iii) Integrated Development
Environment, iv) General purpose input-output (GPIO), v) Analog interface,
vi) Timers, vii) Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL).
UNIT IV: Communication Protocol: 8
i) overview of Serial Peripheral Interface Protocol (SPI protocol), ii)
overview of Inter –IC (I2C) communication protocol, iii) overview of
Universal Asynchronous Receiver/Transmitter (UART) protocol, iv)
overview of USB communication technology, and v) overview of RFID
communication technology.
UNIT V: Hands on experience on simple embedded systems: 8
i) ADC and DAC, ii) PID control, iii) sensors and actuators, iv) position and
movement control, v) data communication interfaces, and vi) Internet of
Things.
RECOMMENDED TEXT BOOK(S)
1. Ramesh S. Gaonkar, “Microprocessor - Architecture, Programming
and Applications with the 8085”, 5th edition, Penram International
Publishing Private Limited.
2. Ayala, Kenneth J. "The 8051 Microcontroller Architecture
Programming and Applications”, West Publishing Company.
3. Muhammad Ali Mazidi, Janice Gillispie Mazidi, Rolin D. McKinlay,
“The 8051 Microcontroller and Embedded Systems Using Assembly
and C”, 2nd edition.
4. Simon Monk, “Programming Arduino Getting Started with Sketches”,
McGraw-Hill Education.
5. Donald Norris, “Programming with STM32 Getting Started with the
Nucleo Board and C/C++”, McGraw-Hill Education.
REFERENCE TEXT BOOKS
1. KCS Murti, “Design Principles for Embedded Systems”, Springer
Verlag, Singapore, First Edition.
ECE203: Signals and Systems
1. Classification and representation of signals and systems, Continuous time & Discrete time
signals and systems, Impulse and Step response of a system, linear systems, linearity, time
invariance, causality, signal properties -LTI systems, Convolution
2. Fourier series, Fourier transform and properties, relation between Fourier transform and
Fourier series, Sampling and reconstruction, Group delay, Phase delay, DFT.
3. Laplace transforms- representation of signals using continuous time complex exponentials,
relation of Laplace and Fourier transform, concept of ROC and transfer function- block diagram
representation, Inverse Laplace transform, properties, analysis and characterization of LTI
systems using Laplace transforms.
4. Z transforms- representation of signals using discrete time complex exponentials-properties,
inverse Z transforms, ROC, Analysis and characterization of LTI systems using Z transforms,
block diagram, transfer functions
5. Introduction to random variable and random process, State space analysis, Introduction to Two
port networks and parameters.
RECOMMENDED TEXT BOOK(S)
1. A.V. Oppenheim, A.S. Willsky & S.H. Nawab, “Signals & Systems”, 2nd edition, PHI, 1997.
2. Lathi, B. P., “Principles of Linear Systems and Signals”, 2nd Ed., Oxford University Press.
3. S. Haykin & B. Van Veen, “Signals and Systems”, 2nd edition, John Wiley & sons, 2004.
4. Ziemer and Tranter, “Signals and Systems, 4th edition, Pearson LPE.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE204: Analog Circuits
1. Review of BJT and MOSFET: Review of physical properties and basic I-V equations of BJT and
MOSFET; various biasing operating modes of BJT and MOSFET, Low-frequency incremental
equivalent circuits
2. Two-Port Networks and their parameters: Hybrid Parameters of BJT.
3. Transistor biasing schemes: Resistive Biasing and Current Mirror Biasing
4. Small-signal Analysis of Amplifiers: Single-stage amplifiers-CE, CB and CC and their MOSFET
counterparts.
5. Multi-transistor Amplifiers: Darlington pair, Difference amplifier, and Active load and Cascade
amplifier.
6. Frequency Response: High-frequency model and Frequency Response of different types of
amplifiers.
7. Basic Operational Amplifier Design: Frequency Response of Op-Amp, gain margin, phase
margin, compensation of gain margin and phase margin, Negative feedback and its impact on
amplifier performance - gain and bandwidth, design of two-stage Op-amp.
8. A few applications of Op-Amps e.g. oscillators, filters.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Text Books
1. Microelectronic Circuits: Theory And Applications: Fifth Edition, by Sedra, Adel S.; Smith,
Kenneth C., Oxford University Press, 2007
2. Electronic Devices and Circuits, Sixth Edition by Theodore F Bogart, Pearson, 2011.
• Reference Books
1. Microelectronics: Circuit Analysis and Design (ISE), 4th Edition by Donald A. Neamen, Mc-
Graw Hill 2021.
2. Electronic Devices and Circuit Theory: 9th Edition by Robert Boylestad, Pearson, 2007.
3. Operational Amplifiers with Linear Integrated Circuits, 4th Edition, by William D. Stanley,
Pearson, 2004.
ECE205: Electromagnetic Engineering
1. Review of vector algebra and calculus, coordinate transformations, Scalar and Vector fields, Vector
calculus, Divergence, the Divergence Theorem, Curl and Stokes theorem.
2. Electrostatics: Coulomb’s Law and concept of Electric Field, Electric field due to charge
distribution, Gauss’s law, Electric potential, Electric field in materials, Conductors and Dielectrics,
Material polarization, Boundary conditions, Resistance and capacitance, Method of Images,
Poisson’s and Laplace’s equations.
3. Magnetostatics: Bio-Savart law, Ampere’s Law and its applications, Maxwell’s equation for static
EM fields, Magnetic materials, Boundary conditions, Inductor and inductance, magnetization,
magnetic energy.
4. Maxwell’s Equations: Faraday’s law, Inconsistency of Amperes law, Continuity equation,
Displacement current, Maxwell’s equations, Boundary conditions, different forms of Maxwell’s
equations.
5. Transmission Line: Transmission line parameters and equations, characteristic impedance, open
and short circuited lines, standing wave and reflection losses. Impedance matching, Smith Chart,
Simple and double stub matching.
6. EM Wave Propagation: Wave propagation in free space, Conductors and dielectrics, Polarization,
Phasor notation, Phase velocity, Group velocity; Reflection at the surface of the conductive medium,
Surface Impedance, Depth of penetration, Poynting theorem, Poynting Vectors and power loss in a
plane conductor.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
7. Antenna and Radiation: Scalar and vector potentials. Radiation from a current filament, half-wave
dipole and small loop antennas. Antenna characteristics, radiation pattern, radiation intensity,
directivity and power gain., Effective area and Friis equation.
8. Electromagnetic Interference and Electromagnetic Compatibility: Introduction to
Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) and Electromagnetic Compatibility (EMC).
9. Bio-Electromagnetics: Retinal optic fibers, Heart dipole field, Biological fields.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. Engineering Electromagnetics - William H. Hayt, Jr.
2. Elements of Electromagnetics- M. N. O. Sadiku, Oxford University Press.
3. Field and wave electromagnetics - D. K. Cheng, pearson.
4. Electromagnetic Waves & Radiation Systems, Jordon E C Balmain.
5. Electromagnetic Field Theory & Transmission Lines, G S N Raju, Pearson
6. Electromagnetics with Applications, Kraus & Fleisch, TMH.
ECE206: Power Electronics and Machine Drives
1. Introduction to power electronic circuits, Examples of power electronic converters and range of
controlled power.
2. Active mode versus switched mode operation, losses in switches, cooling requirements,
heatsink specifications
3. Brief description of construction and working of power diodes, thyristors, power MOSFET and
IGBT, their switching characteristics.
4. Different methods of triggering a thyristor, gate drive circuits for IGBT and MOSFET. Static and
dynamic switching characteristics of power diode and thyristor, requirement of snubber
circuits.
5. AC to DC conversion (uncontrolled type): Uncontrolled rectifier using diodes for both single-
phase and three-phase ac input, discussion on output filter and ac source current.
6. AC to DC controlled conversion using thyristors for both single-phase and three-phase ac supply.
Half controlled and fully controlled rectifiers for resistive and inductive loads, Waveforms of
supply and load side currents and voltages, expression for output voltage, Concept
of distortion and displacement power factor, harmonic distortion factors /THD etc.
7. DC to DC conversion: Concept of buck and boost converter assuming ideal switches and diodes.
Practical buck and boost converter using thyristors, MOSFETs and IGBTs. Advantage of higher
frequency switching, switching losses, limitations due to switching speed, stray inductance etc.
8. Switched Mode Power Supply Circuits: fly-back and forward types, considerations on high
frequency transformer design, practical SMPS circuits.
9. DC to AC conversion (Inversion): Inverters for DC to single phase AC conversion, DC to three
phase AC conversion, PWM Inverter, PWM techniques, Sine wave PWM (SPWM) and selective
harmonic elimination type PWM techniques.
10. AC to AC conversion: phase angle control using TRIACs
11. Introduction to Electric Drives: What is Electric Drive? Different components of Electric Drive,
Different types of Electric Drives.
12. Dynamics of Electric Drives: Fundamentals of speed-torque relations, multi-quadrant operation
in speed-torque plane, Nature and classification of load torques, Calculation of time and energy
spent in transient operations, steady state stability of drives.
13. DC Motor Drives: Overview of different types of dc motors and their torque-speed
characteristics, starting and braking methods of dc motors, conventional speed control
methods, modern speed control methods using power electronic converters, time and energy
loss calculations during starting and braking of separately excited dc motor.
14. Induction Motor Drives: Overview of 3-phase Induction motor torque-speed characteristics,
squirrel-cage and slip-ring induction motor, different types of starting and braking of induction
motor, time and energy loss calculations in transient operation of induction motor, Speed
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
control of 3-phase induction motor using conventional methods and using power electronic
converters, V/f control and slip power recovery based control of induction motor speed and
torque, torque-speed characteristics and speed control of single phase induction motor.
15. Brushless DC motor, Switched Reluctance Motor & Stepper Motor Drives: Brief mention of
Construction, operation and control of these drives.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. Power Electronics: Circuits, Devices and Applications, by M. H. Rashid, Pearson publishers, India.
2. Power Electronics: Converters, Applications and Design by Ned Mohan, Tore M. Undeland, and
William P. Robbins, John Wiley & Sons.
3. Fundamentals of Electrical Drives by G .K .Dubey, CRC Press.
ECE207: Principles of Communication Engineering
1. Review of Signals & Systems: Fourier series, Fourier transform and its properties, Hilbert
transform, complex-baseband representation.
2. Analog Amplitude & Angle Modulation Schemes: amplitude modulation techniques: double-
sideband (DSB) modulation, full amplitude modulation (Full AM) and its variants (SSB/VSB),
Frequency translation and mixing. Phase and Frequency modulation, Demodulation of FM,
Frequency division multiplexing (FDM).
3. Review of Probability Theory: Random variable and Random processes, probability
distribution, statistical averages, some useful distributions, auto-correlation (in continuous and
discrete-time), White Gaussian noise process: auto-correlation function and power spectral
density, LTI filtering.
4. Performance of Analog Communication Schemes in the presence of noise: The effect of additive
white Gaussian noise in the reception of amplitude and angle-modulated signals.
5. Baseband Data communication: Line codes and their power spectra, Effects of filtering of digital
data – ISI, Pulse shaping- Nyquist’s criterion for zero ISI, Baseband digital data transmission in
white Gaussian noise: Matched filter and correlation.
6. Introduction to Digital Communication: A basic form of a digital communication system,
Geometrical representation of signals, Gram Schmidt orthogonalization procedure, Signal Space
Representation of M-ary Signal Sets, Conversion of the continuous AWGN channel into a vector
channel, Likelihood functions, Coherent detection of signals in noise - MAP & ML detection,
Correlation receiver, Equivalence of correlation and matched filter receivers, Probability of
error, bit versus Symbol error probabilities.
7. Passband Digital Data communication: Hierarchy of digital modulation techniques and their
constellations: BPSK, QPSK, M-ary QAM, M-ary PSK, Minimum Shift Keying (MSK), Frequency
Shift Keying (FSK). Coherent detection of signals: Probability of error and performance
comparison. Non-coherent reception and their performance.
8. Introduction to carrier and symbol timing synchronization: Importance in signal demodulation,
carrier frequency and phase estimation– decision directed and power of N methods, symbol
timing estimation.
9. Multiple access schemes: TDMA, FDMA, CDMA.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1 Simon Haykin, “Communication Systems”, 4th Edition, John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
2 Rodger E. Ziemer and William H. Tranter, “Principles of Communication-Systems,
Modulation and Noise”, 7th Edition, John Wiley & Sons, 2015.
3 S. Haykin and M. Moher, Introduction to Analog & Digital Communications, 2nd Edition, John
Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2007.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE301: Control Systems
1. Introduction and Mathematical Modeling of Physical Systems: Classification of control
systems: Open-loop and Closed-loop systems, Effect of feedback, Mathematical modeling of
physical systems, Transfer Function, Block diagrams of control systems, Block diagram
manipulations.
2. Time-Domain Analysis: Standard test signals for the time response of control systems, Time-
response of 1st order and 2nd order systems, Transient and steady-state responses, Steady-state
errors, Static error constants, Type-0, Type-1, and Type-2 systems, Effects of adding poles and
zeros to transfer functions, Dominant poles.
3. Stability of Linear Control Systems: Bounded-Input Bounded-Output (BIBO) stability, Absolute
and relative Stability, Routh-Hurwitz stability criterion.
Root Locus Technique: Defining root locus, properties and sketching of root locus for negative
and positive feedback systems, Design via root locus; Improving steady-state and transient
response using cascade compensation, PI, PD, and PID controllers, Lag, lead, and lag-lead
compensators.
4. Frequency-Domain Analysis: Correlation between time-domain and frequency-domain
analysis, Polar plot and Bode plots, Introduction to Nyquist stability criterion, Nyquist plot, Gain
margin and phase margin, Constant M and N circles; Nichols Chart, Design of feedback control
systems using frequency response techniques.
5. State-Variable Analysis: Concept of state-space representation, converting a transfer function
to state-space, converting state-space to transfer function, state-transition matrix and its
properties, linearization, Laplace transform and time-domain solution of state equations,
observability and controllability of linear Systems.
6. Introduction to digital control systems.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Textbooks:
1. M. Gopal, Control Systems: Principles and Design. McGraw-Hill, 4th edition, 2012.
2. N. Nise, Control Systems Engineering. Wiley India, 7th edition, 2011.
• Reference Books:
1. B. C. Kuo and F. Golnaraghi, Automatic Control Systems. Wiley India, 4th edition, 2009.
2. K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering. Prentice Hall India Learning Private Limited, 5th
edition, 2015.
ECE302: Digital Signal Processing
1. Discrete time signals and systems: Sequences; representation of signals on orthogonal basis;
Sampling and reconstruction of signals; State Space representations.
2. Discrete systems: attributes, Z-Transform, Analysis of LSI systems, Frequency analysis, Inverse
Systems, Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT), Fast Fourier Transform algorithm, Implementation
of Discrete Time Systems.
3. Design of FIR Digital filters: Window method, Eigen based methods, Park-McClellan's method.
4. Design of IIR Digital Filters: All pass based design, Butterworth, Chebyshev and Elliptic
Approximations; Low pass, Band pass, Band stop and High pass filters, Matched filters, CIC filter
design. Effect of finite register length in FIR filter design.
5. Parametric and non-parametric spectral estimation. Introduction to Multirate signal processing.
Application of DSP to Speech and Radar signal processing
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1 A. V. Oppenheim and R. W. Schafer, Digital Signal Processing. Pearson 2015.
2 J. G. Proakis and D. G. Manolakis, Digital Signal Processing. Pearson 2009.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE303: Computer Organization and Design
1. Internal operation of computers: Layers of a computer system, operating systems,
compiler/assembler/linker/loader, number systems/representations, binary arithmetic,
memory types/management, limits imposed by VLSI manufacturing process such as limitations
of Moore’s Law, power and yield/cost
2. RISC-V Instruction Set Architecture: Assembly language, execution, function calls, branches
3. Datapath design with single-cycle non-pipelined control: Adding support for instructions one
by one
4. Pipelined Datapath and control: Performance and energy “Iron Laws” of CPU design, pipelined
datapath and control, hazards
5. Memory hierarchy and caches: Memory hierarchies, cache hits, misses, write policies,
replacement policies, multi-processor caches and coherency, virtual memory
6. Interrupts and pipelined datapaths
7. Parallelism: Amdahl’s Law, data-level parallelism, vector instructions, loop-unrolling, thread-
level parallelism, hardware threads versus software threads
8. Miscellaneous: Benchmarks, design process, architecture simulators for functionality and
performance
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1 Computer Organization and Design RISC-V Edition: The Hardware Software Interface, D. A.
Patterson and J. L. Hennessy; Morgan Kaufmann Publishers.
ECE304: Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning
1. Types of Learning: Supervised, Unsupervised and Reinforcement; Regression and Classification
Problems.
2. Concepts: Bias and Variance, Generalization, Overfitting, Training and Test Datasets, Cross-
validation, Accuracy Measures for Regression and Classification, Imbalanced Datasets.
3. Statistical Learning: Naïve Bayes Classifier, k-NN Classifier, Linear Regression, Logistic
Regression, Softmax function.
4. Support Vector Machines: Optimum Margin Classifier, Constrained Optimization, Lagrange
Multipliers, Primal/Dual Problems, KKT Conditions, Kernels, Quadratic Programming.
5. Neural Networks: Multilayer Perceptron Networks, Backpropagation, Nonlinear Regression,
Multiclass Discrimination, Training Procedures
6. Decision Trees: Concepts, C4.5 and CART Decision Trees
7. Unsupervised Learning: K-means Clustering, Gaussian Mixture Models
8. Dimensionality Reduction: Feature Selection, Principal Component Analysis, Linear
Discriminant Analysis.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. M. Gopal, “Applied Machine Learning”, 2nd Edition McGraw-Hill, 2022.
2. E. Alpaydin, “Introduction to Machine Learning”, 3rd Edition, The MIT Press, 2014.
3. T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani and J. Friedman, “The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining,
Inference and Prediction”, 2nd Edition, Springer, 2009.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE351: VLSI Design
1. Introduction to VLSI, MOSFET basics, short channel MOS issues, CMOS basic flow, Design of digital
and combinational blocks, emerging device technologies trends as per ITRS.
2. CAD and Computer Tools Used: Cadence Virtuoso
3. Models for Digital Design (5): Miller Capacitance, the Digital MOSFET Model, and Effective
Switching Resistance of Long Channel MOSFET, Short-Channel MOSFET Effective Switching
Resistance, Capacitive Effects.
4. CMOS Technology (6): Static CMOS inverter, DC Characteristics, Noise Margins, Inverter
Switching Point, Ideal Inverter VTC. Dynamic Characteristics of CMOS inverter: Computing the
capacitance-propagation delay sizing inverter for performance optimization. Combinational MOS
logic circuits (Parallel Connection of MOSFETs, Series Connection of MOSFETs, NAND Gate, Quick
Estimate of Delays, Number of Inputs, and Complex CMOS Logic Gates.
5. Other Design Styles (5): MOSFET Pass Gate, Delay through a Pass Gate, Transmission Gate, Sizing
in Pass transistor. Applications of the Transmission Gate as Path Selector and Static Circuits.
Differential Cascode Voltage Switch Logic, Pseudo NMOS, and other logic design styles
6. Delay Analysis (6): Delay analysis using Elmore Delay, Delay analysis using Logical and electrical
effort. Designing the circuits for large capacitive loads. Analysis of Super buffer. Delay calculation
in datapath.
7. Designing logic for reduced supply voltages (3): Introduction, Overview of Power Consumption,
and Low-Power Design through Voltage Scaling, Estimation and Optimization of Switching
Activity, Reduction of Switched Capacitance.
8. Dynamic CMOS design (4): Fundamentals of Dynamic Logic, Charge Leakage, Dynamic Circuits,
Domino logic, Optimization of Domino logic, and NORA logic.
9. Design of sequential Circuit (4): Bistability Principle, Timing metric, Edge Triggered Register
Design, TSPC Design
10. Memory Design (6): Array Subsystem, Design of NAND ROM, NOR ROM, Decoders Design for
ROM, Introduction to NVM. Design of Programmable Logic: Pseudo NMOS PLA, 6T SRAM Design,
Read, Write and Hold operations of 6T-SRAM, SRAM peripheral Design, Introduction to DRAMs.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Text Books
1. Principles of CMOS VLSI Design. A Systems Perspective, 3rd Edition, by Neil H. E. Weste,
Karman Eshraghian, Addison-Wesley, 2004
2. CMOS Digital Integrated Circuits: Analysis and Design, S.-M. Kang and Y. Leblebici, 2nd Edition,
McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1999
• Reference Books
1. Circuit design layout and simulation, R. Jacob Baker,3rd Edition, Wiley Publication,2010
2. Digital Integrated Circuits: A Design Perspective, Jan M. Rabaey, Prentice Hall, Inc., 1996
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE352: Photovoltaic Power Generation
1. Introduction of Solar Cell: Renewable energy sources, Current status of PV power generation in
India, Advantages and challenges of solar energy, Solar cell technology, P-N junction diode,
Introduction to P-N junction in equilibrium and non-equilibrium conditions, P-N junction under
illumination: solar cell, Generation of a photo voltage, Photo generated current, Current-voltage
(I-V) equation of solar cell, I-V characteristics of solar cell.
2. Design of PV Cell, Module and Array: Short circuit current, Open circuit voltage, Fill factor,
Efficiency, modelling of a PV cell, Effect of series and shunt resistances on efficiency, Effect of
solar radiation and temperature on efficiency, modelling of a PV module and array
3. Solar Radiation: Extra-terrestrial solar radiation, Solar spectrum at the Earth’s surface,
Declination angle, Apparent motion of the sun and solar altitude, Angle of sunrays on solar
collector, Sun tracking, Estimation of solar radiation empirically
4. Identification of Solar PV Module: PV parameters estimation of a single diode model (SDM) and
double diode model (DDM) PV module, Conversion of PV module parameters to array
parameters, Temperature and solar irradiation dependence PV parameters, Study of I-V and
power-voltage (P-V) characteristics of a PV array under different environmental conditions
using Matlab simulation
5. Maximum Power Point Tracking (MPPT) Methods of a PV Source: Fractional short-circuit
current (FSCI) technique, Fractional open circuit voltage (FOCV) technique, Hill Climbing/
Perturb & Observed (PO), Incremental conductance, One cycle control (OCC) technique,
Differention technique, Feedback voltage and current technique, Load current/Load voltage
maximization technique, Fuzzy logic based MPPT technique, Artificial neural network based
MPPT technique, Particle swarm optimization based MPPT technique, Gauss-Newton, Steepest-
Decent, Levenberg-Marquardt
6. Partial Shading of a PV Array: Shading effect of a PV array, Mismatch loss, Different types of PV
configuration to reduce mismatch loss, Effect of bypass diode in a PV array under shading
conditions, Extraction of maximum power from a PV array under partial shading conditions
7. Power Electronics Application in PV System: DC to DC converters, Control of DC to DC converter,
Input side reflected impedance of DC to DC converters, DC to AC converter (Inverter), Grid
integrated PV system: Single phase grid connection, Three phase grid connection.
8. PV System with Storage: Cells and batteries, Lead acid cell, Nickel cadmium storage cell, Nickel
metal hydride (NiMH) Cells, Lithium cells, Stand-alone PV system, Design of PV water pumping
system
9. Impact of DG integration on power quality and reliability: Power quality distrubances:
Transients, Voltage sags and swells, Over-voltages and under-voltages, Outage, Harmonic
distortion, Voltage notching, Flicker, Electrical noise, Impact of DG integration: Simple standby
generation scheme, Secondary DG system with power quality support, Primary DG system with
power quality support to priority loads, Soft grid-connected DG with power quality support to
priority loads, DG with intermittent solar PV within power quality environment
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Text Books:
1. Chetan Singh Solanki, “Solar Photovoltaics: Fundamentals, Technologies and Applications”,
PHI learning publication, 2015.
2. Remus Teodorescu, Pedro Rodriguez, Dezso Sera, Sergiu Spataru, Laszlo Mathe, Sergiu
Spataru, “Grid Connected Photovoltaic Power Systems”, John Wiley & Sons Inc, 2019
3. S. Chowdhury, S.P. Chowdhury and P. Crossley, “Microgrids and Active Distribution
Networks”, IET, First Edition, 2009.
• Reference Books
1. A. K. Mukerjee and Nivedita Thakur, “Photovoltaic Systems: Analysis and Design”, PHI
learning publication, 2011.
2. Garg & Prakash and H. P. Garg, “Solar Energy Fundamentals and Applications”, Tata McGraw-
Hill Education, 2017.
3. Ali Keyhani, “Design of Smart Power Grid Renewable Energy Systems”, Wiley- IEEE Press,
2011.
4. Mukund R. Patel, “Wind and Solar Power Systems: Design, Analysis, and Operation”, Taylor
& Francis, 2006.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE353: Microwave Engineering
Introduction of Microwaves and their applications. Waveguides: Rectangular Waveguides, Solution of
Wave equation in TE and TM modes. Power transmission and Power losses. Excitation of modes in
Rectangular waveguides, circular waveguides: Basic idea of TE and TM modes, field patterns, TEM mode
of propagation. Waveguide Components: Scattering matrix representation of networks, Rectangular
cavity and circular cavity resonators. Waveguide Tees, Magic Tees. Hybrid rings. Waveguide corners,
Bends and twists, Directional couplers, Circulators and isolators, Windows, Irises, tuning screws.
Measurement: frequency, Wave length, VSWR, Impedance, power. Microwave Tubes: Klystron, Reflex
Klystron, Magnetron, TWT, BWO: Their schematic, Principle of operation, performance characteristics
and application. Semiconductor Devices: Construction, Operation and Practical applications of PIN diode,
varactor and Tunnel diode, Gunn diode, IMPATT, TRAPTT diodes, Maser MIC: Introduction to microstrip
lines, Parallel Striplines, Coplanar striplines, Shielded striplines, Slot lines, Transitions, Bends and
Discontinuities
RECOMMENDED BOOK
1. D. M. Pozar, Micowave Engineering. 4th ed. John Wiley and Sons, Inc.
ECE354: Sensor, Measurement, and Actuators
UNIT I: SENSORS
Difference between sensor, transmitter and transducer, Primary measuring elements - selection and
characteristics: Range; resolution, Sensitivity, error, repeatability, linearity and accuracy, impedance,
backlash, Response time, Dead band. Signal transmission - Types of signal: Pneumatic signal; Hydraulic
signal; Electronic Signal. Principle of operation, construction details, characteristics and applications of
potentiometer, Proving Rings, Strain Gauges, Resistance thermometer, Thermistor, Hot-wire
anemometer, Resistance Hygrometer, Photo-resistive sensor.
UNIT II: INDUCTIVE & CAPACITIVE TRANSDUCER
Inductive transducers: - Principle of operation, construction details, characteristics and applications of
LVDT, Induction potentiometer, variable reluctance transducer, synchros, microsyn. Capacitive
transducers: - Principle of operation, construction details, characteristics of Capacitive transducers –
different types & signal conditioning, Applications:- capacitor microphone, capacitive pressure sensor,
proximity sensor.
UNIT III: ACTUATORS
Definition, types and selection of Actuators; linear; rotary; Logical and Continuous Actuators, Pneumatic
actuator Electro-Pneumatic actuator; cylinder, rotary actuators, Mechanical actuating system: Hydraulic
actuator - Control valves; Construction, Characteristics and Types, Selection criteria. Electrical actuating
systems: Solid-state switches, Solenoids, Electric Motors- Principle of operation and its application: D.C
motors - AC motors - Single phase & 3 Phase Induction Motor; Synchronous Motor; Stepper motors -
Piezoelectric Actuator.
UNIT IV: MICRO SENSORS AND MICRO ACTUATORS
Micro Sensors: Principles and examples, Force and pressure micro sensors, position and speed micro
sensors, acceleration micro sensors, chemical sensors, biosensors, temperature micro sensors and flow
micro sensors. Micro Actuators: Actuation principle, shape memory effects-one way, two way and
pseudo elasticity. Types of micro actuators- Electrostatic, Magnetic, Fluidic, Inverse piezo effect, other
principles.
UNIT V: SENSOR MATERIALS AND PROCESSING TECHNIQUES
Materials for sensors: Silicon, Plastics, metals, ceramics, glasses, nano materials Processing techniques:
Vacuum deposition, sputtering, chemical vapour deposition, electro plating, photolithography, silicon
micro machining, Bulk silicon micro machining, Surface silicon micro machining, LIGA process.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
Textbooks:
1. Patranabis. D, “Sensors and Transducers”, Wheeler publisher, 1994.
2. Sergej Fatikow and Ulrich Rembold, “Microsystem Technology and Microbotics”, First edition,
Springer –Verlag New York, Inc, 1997.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
3. Jacob Fraden, “Hand Book of Modern Sensors: Physics, Designs and Application” Fourth edition,
Springer, 2010.
Reference Books:
1. Robert H Bishop, “The Mechatronics Hand Book”, CRC Press, 2002.
2. Thomas. G. Bekwith and Lewis Buck. N, Mechanical Measurements, Oxford and IBH publishing
Co. Pvt. Ltd.,
3. Massood Tabib-Azar, “Microactuators: Electrical, Magnetic, thermal, optical, mechanical,
chemical and smart structures”, First edition, Kluwer academic publishers, Springer, 1997.
4. Manfred Kohl, “Shape Memory Actuators”, first edition, Springer.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE355: Scientific Computing using MATLAB
1. Fundamental Concepts: Variables and constants, basic statement structure, input/output,
algebraic operations, logic operations, loop control, conditional control, switch, graphical output
2D and 3D.
2. Matrices and Eigenvalues: Basic operation and properties of matrices, matrix inversion,
generalized matrix inversion, matrix transformation, solving matrix equations, eigenvalues and
vector, transformation and diagonalization, power method, Jacobi method,
3. Linear and Non-linear equations: Gauss and Gauss-Jordan eliminations, Matrix factorization,
iterative method, bisection method, Newton-Raphson method, Secant method.
4. Calculus Problems: Solution to limit problems, solution to derivative problems, partial
derivatives, partial derivatives of implicit functions, derivative of parametric equations, gradient,
divergence and curl, solution to indefinite, definite and improper integral problems, multiple
integrals, Taylor and Fourier series expansion, path and line integrals, scalar and vector surface
integrals, numerical differentiation, numerical integration.
5. Differential equations: Numerical solution of ordinary differential equations, solution of special
ordinary differential equations, solution of boundary value problems, Partial differential equation
(PDE), Elliptical PDE, Parabolic PDE, Hyperbolic PDE.
6. Transforms and Complex valued functions: Laplace transform and their inverse, Fourier
transform and their inverse, z transform and their inverse, complex matrices, computation of
poles and residues, solution of difference equations.
7. Data Interpolation: Interpolation and data fitting of 1D, 2D and higher order, spline
interpolation, fitting mathematical models, signal analysis and digital signal processing.
8. Probability and Statistics: Probability density function (PDF) and cumulative distribution
function (CDF), probability computation of continuous functions, Monte-Carlo solution, random
walk problems, mean and variance of stochastic processes, moments of stochastic processes,
covariance of multivariate stochastic processes, joint PDFs and CDFs, statistical estimation.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. Otto, Stephen Robert, and James P. Denier, “An introduction to programming and numerical
methods in MATLAB”, Springer, 2005.
2. Bashier, Eihab BM., “Practical Numerical and Scientific Computing with MATLAB and Python”,
CRC Press, 2020.
3. Yang, Won Y., Wenwu Cao, Jaekwon Kim, Kyung W. Park, Ho-Hyun Park, Jingon Joung, Jong-Suk
Ro, Han L. Lee, Cheol-Ho Hong, and Taeho Im, “Applied numerical methods using MATLAB”, John
Wiley & Sons, 2020.
4. Palm, William John, “Introduction to MATLAB for Engineers”, McGraw-Hill, 2011.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE356: RF and Microwave Circuit Design
1. Introduction: Frequency spectrum, frequency behaviour of passive components & chip
components.
2. Transmission Line: Transmission lines, electrical equivalent circuit analysis, sending port
impedance, input impedance, voltage standing wave, transmission line matching, smith chart,
impedance and admittance transformations, impedance matching networks.
3. Two-port Networks: Series and parallel networks, Z-parameter, Y-parameter and h-
parameter, S-parameters, X-parameter, ABCD parameters, conversion of different network
parameters.
4. RF Filter Design: Basics of filter configurations, Butterworth and Chebyshev type filters, Filter
design by the Image Parameter method and Insertion Loss method, Implementation of
microwave filters.
5. RF Transistor Amplifier Design: Amplifier characteristics, Amplifier parameters, stability
criteria, Amplifier design for maximum gain, constant gain, noise figure and VSWR circles,
Introduction to Doherty amplifier.
6. RF Oscillators: Basic oscillator model, negative resistance and feedback oscillator designs,
quartz oscillators, electronic tuning of oscillator, phase locked loop.
7. RF Mixers: Basic characteristics of mixers, single ended mixers, single balanced
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Text Books
1 Ludwig, R. and Bretchko, P., “RF Circuit Design”, Pearson Education, 2000.
2 Misra, D.K., “Radio-frequency and Microwave Communication Circuits”, John Wiley & Sons,
2001.
• Reference Books
1. Fooks, E.H. and Zakarevicius, R.A., “Microwave Engineering Using Microstrip Circuits,” Prentice-
Hall, 1990
2. Franco di Paolo, “Networks and Devices using Planar Transmission Lines,” CRC Press, 2000.
3. Pozar, D.M., “Microwave Engineering”, 3rd Ed., John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
4. Roberto Sorrentino and Giovanni Bianchi, “Microwave and RF Engineering” John Wiley & Sons,
2010.
5. B. Bhat and S. K. Koul, Stripline Like Transmission Lines For Microwave Integrated
Circuits New Age Intl. Pvt Ltd., 2007.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE357: Introduction to Robotics
1. Sensing, Localization, Mapping, Planning, Control and Actuation.
2. Localization via Kalman/Complimentary Filter, localization with noisy data
3. Mapping via Grid based Mapper, 2D, 2.5D and 3D grid based mapping
4. Planning Via Arc based, Grid based planner and heuristic search.
5. Dynamics and control via PID controller, Joint space control, iterative control for speed and
direction of movement
6. Navigation using waypoint follower, navigation in absence of GPS
7. Forward and Inverse Kinematics, Jacobian representation.
8. Basics of Computer vision, spatial descriptions and pose transformations.
9. Basics of Neural networks and robot learning mechanisms
10. Common types of Actuators, motors, and sensors and their principles
11. Navigation mechanisms, differential and skid steering in mobile robots and drones
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Text Books
1. Introduction to Autonomous Mobile Robots, Book by Illah Reza Nourbakhsh and Roland
Siegwart 2nd edition
2. Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and Control, John J. Craig, Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company, 3rd Edition,
• Reference Books
1. Robot Modelling and Control, M. Spong, M. Vidyasagar, S. Hutchinson, Wiley & Sons, 2005.
2. Robotics, Vision, and Control, Peter Corke, Springer, 2011.
3. Introduction to Robotics, P. J. McKerrow, ISBN: 0201182408
4. Modern Robotics: Mechanics, Planning, and Control, Kevin Lynch and Frank Park, Cambridge
University Press, 2017. ISBN: 9781107156302.
ECE360: IoT - Architecture, Communication Technology, and Applications
1. Introduction: Introduction of IoT, Architectural Overview, Design principles and needed
capabilities, IoT applications, Sensing, Actuation, Basics of networking, Wireless sensor
networks, M2M and IoT technology, Fundamentals - Devices gateways, Data management,
Business processes in IoT, Role of Cloud in IoT, Security aspects in IoT.
2. Elements of IoT
3. Hardware components- Computing (Arduino/Raspberry Pi), Communication, Sensing,
Actuation, I/O interfaces.
4. Communication Protocols ZigBee, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi-IEEE802.11a,n,ac,ax,ah,af,p, LPWAN-
LoRa, Sigfox, NB-IoT, LTE-M
5. Software Components- Programming API’s (using Python/Node.js/Arduino) for
communication protocols- MQTT, COAP, UDP, TCP
6. IoT Application Development: Solution framework for IoT applications:-> Implementation of
device integration, Data acquisition and integration, Device data storage- Unstructured data
storage on cloud/local server, Authentication, authorization of devices
7. Cloud, edge, and fog computing architectures for IoT applications. The OpenFog reference
architecture. Case studies from various domains (details TBD).
8. IoT Case Studies: IoT case studies and mini projects based on Industrial automation,
Transportation, Agriculture, Healthcare, Smart Home, Smart building, Smart City
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE361: Power System Analysis
1. Per unit system representation. Primitive network, single phase and of three phase.
2. Ybus and Zbus; Building algorithm for the formation of Zbus with coupling.
3. Power system load flow studies, necessity, data requirements, network flow equations both in
Polar and rectangular co-ordinates, line flow and line losses; types of busses for load flow;
numerical methods of load flow solution- Gauss, Gauss Seidel, Newton Raphson methods in
polar and rectangular co-ordinates without and with PV buses; Decoupled, fast decoupled and
DC load flows. Their comparisons.
4. Short-circuit analysis of power system; introduction to symmetrical component transformation
and obtaining sequence components Generator, Transformer and transmission line impedances;
sequence impedance diagrams of network and flow of currents in transformers. Computer
methods for the solution of balance and unbalance faults in three phase networks.
5. Power System stability, definition, elementary ideas of steady state, dynamic stability. Surge
impedance loading and problems of long transmission lines, series and shunt compensation.
6. Power System transient stability, determination of swing curve, Transient stability using equal
area criteria, its limitations, calculation of swing curve by point by point method for single and
multi- machine case. Methods to improve transient stability.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. D.P. Kothari, I. J. Nagrath, “Power System Engineering”, 2nd Edition, Sixteen reprint, 2013
McGraw Hill Education
2. T.N. Nagsarkar, M.S. Sukhija, “Power System Analysis”7th Impression,2012, Oxford Publication
3. M.A. Pai, Dheeman Chatterjee, Third Edition , 5th Reprint, 2017, Mc Graw Hill Education.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE362: Digital Communication
1. Communications Signal and Systems: Introduction to Digital Communication, Representations
of Bandpass Signals and Systems, Inner Product Spaces and Subspaces, Orthonormal bases, Gram
Schmidt orthogonalization procedure, Geometric representation of Signals, Signal Space
Representation of M-ary Signal Sets.
2. Review of Random processes and random variables: Random variables, Some useful
probability distributions: Uniform, Exponential, Gaussian, Rayleigh, Transformation of Random
variables, expectation, variance. White Gaussian noise process: autocorrelation function and
power spectral density, LTI filtering.
3. Baseband and Passband Digital Data communication: Baseband digital data transmission in
white Gaussian noise: Matched filter and correlation. Passband digital data transmission in noise:
Transmission and reception (correlation-based) model. Hierarchy of digital modulation
techniques and their constellations: BPSK, QPSK, M-ary QAM, M-ary PSK, Minimum Shift Keying
(MSK), Frequency Shift Keying (FSK). Coherent detection of signals: Probability of error and
performance comparison. Non-coherent reception and their performance. Intersymbol
interference (ISI) and Equalization.
4. Carrier and Symbol Synchronization: Importance in signal demodulation, carrier frequency
and phase estimation– decision directed and power of N methods, symbol timing estimation–
spectral-line, MMSE, and ML methods. Joint carrier and symbol synchronization.
5. Fundamental Limits of Communication systems: Channel capacity, Coding and Decoding,
Source Coding, Information Measure, Introduction to Error control: Linear Block codes,
Convolution Codes, Hamming, and Turbo codes.
6. Advanced Communication Techniques: Multichannel communications, Spread spectrum
communications, OFDM.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Text Books
1 John G Proakis and Salehi, Digital Communication, 5th Edition, McGraw-Hill, 2008.
2 Simon Haykin, “Communication Systems”, 4th Edition, John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
3 Rodger E. Ziemer and William H. Tranter, “Principles of Communication-Systems, Modulation and
Noise”, 7th Edition, John Wiley & Sons, 2015.
4 B. P. Lathi, “Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems”, 3rd Edition, Oxford University
Press, 1998.
• Reference Books
1. John M. Wozencraft and Irwin Mark Jacobs, “Principles of Communication Engineering,” Wiley,
1965.
2. John R. Barry, Edward A. Lee, David G. Messerschmitt, Digital Communications, Springer, 3rd
Edition, 2004.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE363: Computer Communication Networks
Introduction, OSI Layers: the physical layer, the data link layer, the network layer, the transport layer, the
session layer, the presentation layer, the application layer. The TCP/IP Architecture: Internet, IPV4, IPV6,
Ethernet. WiFi, Cellular Networks: 3G, 4G, 5G, Control of Networks, Mathematical models and
Performance analysis of Networks
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. Computer Networking – A Top-Down Approach by James F. Kurose and Ross, 8th Edition, 2020.
2. High-performance Communication Networks by Jean Walrand and Pravin Varaiya, The Morgan
Kaufmann series in networking, 2nd Edition, New Delhi: Elsevier, c2000.
ECE365: Object Oriented Programming
For the C++ variant:
1. Object oriented analysis and design: Encapsulation, inheritance, polymorphism, operator
overloading
2. Preprocessor: Namespaces, macros, conditional compilation, name mangling and
interoperability with C
3. Functions and variables: Data types, local versus global variables, pointers and references, non-
member functions, passing arguments by value versus reference, function overloading, default
arguments, inline functions
4. Structures: Structures, pointers to structures, poor man’s encapsulation using opaque structures
5. Classes: Encapsulation, member functions, constructors and destructors, initializers, default
constructor, static class members, nested classes, local classes
6. Inheritance: Is-A relation between base and derived classes, access control and
public/protected/private inheritance, multiple inheritance
7. Streams: File/display/keyboard input/output
8. Operator overloading: Syntactic sugar versus real use
9. Error handling: Throwing, catching and propagating exceptions
10. Templates and Generic programming: Templates, template parameters
11. The Standard Template Library (STL): Vectors, sets, maps, etc
12. Program structure: Introduction to the programming environment, header files, source files,
compilation
13. Debugging: Breakpoints, stepping through, watch variables, trace variables, stack trace
14. Miscellaneous: Choosing a suitable development environment, coding standards, etc
For the Python variant:
1. Getting started
2. Object types: Python's core data types like numbers, strings, lists, tuple, dictionary
3. Statements and Syntax: Statements; assignments, expressions, and print; conditional
statements; loops; iterations and comprehensions; the documentation interlude
4. Functions and Generators: Basic functions, scopes, arguments, advanced function topics,
comprehensions & Generations, the benchmarking interlude
5. Modules and Packages: The big picture, module coding basics, module packages, advanced
module topics
6. Classes and OOP: The big picture, class coding basics, class coding details, operator overloading,
designing with classes, advanced class topics
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. C++ Primer, Stanley Lippman, Josée Lajoie and Barbara Moo; Addison-Wesley, 5th edition
2. Online: https://www.cplusplus.com/
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE366: Antenna Theory and Wave Propagation
1. Fundamental Concepts: Concept of Radiation (physical meaning), Potential functions &
Electromagnetic field, Network Theorems, Radiation Pattern, near-field and far-field regions, basic
parameters of antenna (directivity, gain, effective aperture, polarization, input impedance, and
efficiency), Friis transmission equation, Methods of Excitation.
2. Radiation from Wires, Loops, Aperture and Microstrip Antennas: Infinitesimal dipole, finite-
length dipole, dipoles for mobile communication, small circular loop. Huygens’ principle, radiation
from rectangular and circular apertures, design considerations, Babinet’s principle, Radiation from
sectoral and pyramidal horns, design concepts, Basic characteristics of microstrip antennas, feeding
methods, methods of analysis, design of rectangular and circular patch antennas.
3. Antenna Arrays: N element linear array, Broadside and End fire array, pattern multiplication,
Phased array, Adaptive array, Antenna synthesis- Binomial array.
4. Special Antennas: Log-periodic antennas, Spiral Antennas, Helical Antennas, Modern Antenna:
Reconfigurable Antenna, Dielectric Resonator Antennas, Active Antennas, Electronic band Gap
Structure, Terahertz Antennas.
5. Radio Wave Propagation: Modes of propagation, Structure of atmosphere, ground wave
propagation, Tropospheric wave propagation, Duct propagation, Tropo-scatter propagation, Flat
and curved earth concepts, Sky wave propagation, Virtual height, Critical frequency, Maximum
usable frequency, Skip distance, Fading, Multi-hop propagation.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Text Books
1. Constantine A Balanis, “Antenna theory: Analysis and Design” John Wiley & sons, 2015.
2. Raju, G. S. N. “Antennas and wave propagation”, Pearson Education India, 2006.
• Reference Books
1. Kraus, John D., Ronald J. Marhefka, and Ahmad S. Khan. “Antennas and wave propagation”, Tata
McGraw-Hill Education, 2006.
2. Edward C Jordan and Keith G Balmain, “Electromagnetic waves and radiating systems” Pearson
Education; Second edition, 2015.
ECE367: Digital Design with FPGAs
Familiarisation with Xilinx Vivado Suite: i) Installation guide and settings for Xilinx Vivado Suite,
ii) Description of various tool boxes available with Xilinx Vivado Suite.
Verilog Concepts: i) Review of various design styles in Verilog, ii) Combinational and sequential
logic iii) Finite state machine
FPGA Architecture: i) Introduction to various programmable links: PLA, PAL, SPLD, CPLD, FPGA
ii) Various FPGA Technologies iii) Generic architecture of FPGA iv) Familiarization of Nexus-4 FPGA
board
i) Introduction to Static Timing Analysis: STA Basics: What is STA, Purpose of STA, How
does STA fit into the Design Flow, What are Timing Libraries, Elements of Static Timing,
Introduction to Timing Arcs, Timing Arc Characteristic (Unateness, Slew & Delay).
ii) Understanding Cell and Net Delays: Terminology for Cell and Net Delay, Different kind of
Cell Delay, Cell Library Model, and Wire Load Model.
iii) Understanding Clocks: Ideal Clock, Duty Cycle, Clock Skew, Clock Propagation, Clock
uncertainty, Latency, and Understanding of Launch and Capture Clock.
iv) Timing Paths & Timing Checks: Understanding Timing Paths: Start point, End Point, Timing
Paths Types, Slack, Setup and Hold Time, Setup and Hold Violation, Recovery and Removal,
Min Clock period, Path Exceptions: Multi-Cycle paths and false paths.
v) Xilinx Design Constraints (XDC): Design Constraints, Syntax, and Design Objects: Chip, Cell,
Block, Pin, Port, Clock, Environmental Constraints, Design Rules, Timing Constraints,
Exceptions.
Power Report and IP integration
Design Applications: i) General Design Issues, and ii) Implementation of Memory and FIFO iii)
Design for Wireless Communication Systems.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. Wayne and Wolf, “FPGA based system Design”, 11th edition, Pearson Publishing Private Limited.
2. Samir Palnitkar, “Verilog HDL A guide to Digital Design and Synthesis”, SunSoft Press.
3. Clive Maxfield, "The Design Warrior’s Guide to FPGA”, Elsevier Publishing.
4. Andrew Moore and Ron Wilson, "FPGA for dummies”, 2nd special edition by INTEL, Wiley Publishing.
ECE451: Design of CMOS Analog Circuits
1. CMOS Fundamentals: MOSFET physics, concept of threshold voltage, body-effect, DC models, small-signal
models, MOSFET frequency response
2. Single-transistor non-differential stages: Common-source stage (with and without source degeneration),
common-drain stage, common-gate stage
3. Multi-transistor non-differential stages: Cascode stage, active cascode, super source follower
4. Differential pairs: Basic differential pair, DC analysis, small signal analysis, common-mode and differential
mode analysis, key metrics like CMRR/PSRR/Z in /Z out ,/V OS , effect of mismatch on key metrics
5. Current mirrors: Simple current mirror, cascode current mirror, high-swing cascode current mirrors, Wilson
current mirror
6. Active loads: Complementary load, depletion load, diode-connected load, usage in a differential- pair
7. Current sources: Widlar current source, Peaking current source, threshold-voltage-referenced current source,
concept of sensitivity, supply-sensitivity of current sources, self-biasing and start- up circuits
8. Bandgap voltage references: Motivation, temperature sensitivity, general principle, MOS implementation
9. Case study of a 2-stage single-ended MOS Operational Amplifier: Schematic, discussion of metrics like
input offset voltage, input bias current, input offset current, common-mode input range, CMRR, PSRR,
frequency response and slew rate, and the desired design space parameters
10. Feedback: Benefits of feedback, canonical treatment of feedback, various feedback styles and their effect on
key metrics, modelling the loading by feedback networks
11. Frequency response theory: Poles and zeros, Miller effect and its application to a common- source stage,
OCTC and SCTC methods for calculating the dominant and most non-dominant pole, application of the OCTC
method to a 2-transistor circuit
12. Frequency response of feedback amplifiers, stability and compensation: Bode plots, Nyquist
criterion for stability, Phase margin, frequency compensation by narrowbanding, adding a pole versus moving
a pole, pole-splitting and Miller multiplication, slew rate
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1 Analysis and Design of Analog Integrated Circuits, Paul R. Gray, Paul J. Hurst, Stephen H. Lewis and Robert G.
Meyer; John Wiley & Sons, 5th edition
2 Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits, Behzad Razavi; McGraw Hill Education, 2nd edition
ECE368: Special Topics in Microwave Engineering
Advanced concepts in electromagnetics: uniqueness theorem, volume/surface equivalence theorems.
Introduction to integral equations methods (IEM) by using the Huygen’s principle and the extinction
theorem. Introduction to Green’s functions in one and two dimensions, Solving surface integral
equations using the method of moments, how to deal with singularities, and use of quadrature rules,
Solving volume integral equations using the Method of moments, Introduction to the Finite Element
Method (FEM), basis functions in 1 and 2 dimensions , FEM formulations in 1 and 2 dimensions,
Introduction to Finite Difference Time Domain methods (FDTD): Yee cells, update equations, stability,
FDTD - Accuracy Analysis, Dispersion, Material specifications and Dispersive media , FDTD - Boundary
conditions and their implementation, Applications of computational electromagnetics (CEM): Antenna
problems, Applications of CEM: Phased array and Wireless System problems, Applications of CEM:
Inverse Scattering problems
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE452: Power System Operation and Control
1. Economic Operation of Power System: Fundamental of power flow solutions, Power factor
correction, Distribution of load between units within a plant, Distribution of load between plants,
The transmission-loss equation, An interpretation of transformation C, Classical economic dispatch
with losses, Automatic generation control, Unit commitment, Solving the unit commitment
problems.
2. Load Frequency Control and Control Area Concept: Automatic load-frequency control of single
area systems: Speed-governing system, Hydraulic valve actuator, Turbine-generator response,
Static performance of speed governor, Closing the ALFC loop, Concept of control area, ALFC of
multi-control area systems (Pool operation): The two area systems, Modelling the Tie-Line, Block
diagram representation of two area system, Dynamic response of two area system, Supervisory
control and data acquisition (SCADA).
3. Power System Stability Problems: Basic concepts and definitions, Rotor angle stability,
Synchronous machine characteristics, Power versus angle relationship, Stability phenomena,
Voltage stability and voltage collapse, Mid-term and long-term stability, Classification of stability.
4. Small Signal Stability: State space concepts, Basic linearization technique, Participation factors,
Eigen properties of state matrix, Small signal stability of a single machine infinite bus system,
Studies of parametric effect: Effect of loading, Effect of KA, Effect of type of load, Stability
improvement by power system stabilizers. Design of power system stabilizers.
5. Transient Stability: Time domain simulations and direct stability analysis techniques (extended
equal area criterion) Energy function methods: Physical and mathematical aspects of the problem,
Lyapunov’s method, Modelling issues, Energy function formulation, Potential Energy Boundary
Surface (PEBS): Energy function of a single machine infinite bus system, equal area criterion and
the energy function, Multi-machine PEBS.
6. Sub Synchronous Oscillations: Turbine generator torsional characteristics, Shaft system model,
Torsional natural frequencies and mode shapes, Torsional interaction with power system controls:
interaction with generator excitation controls, interaction with speed governors, interaction with
nearby DC converters, Sub Synchronous Resonance (SSR): Characteristics of series capacitor -
compensated transmission systems, Self – excitation due to induction generator effect, Torsional
interaction resulting in SSR, Analytical methods, Counter measures to SSR problems.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. John. J. Grainger & W. D. Stevenson, “Power System Analysis”, Mc Graw Hill Education, Fifteenth
Reprint, 2003.
2. O. I. Elgerd, “An Introduction to Electric Energy System Theory”, Mc Graw Hill Education, Second
Edition, 2013.
3. Prabha Kundur, “Power System Stability and Control”, Mc Graw Hill Education, Edition, Twentieth
Reprint, 2016.
ECE453: Foundations of Deep Learning
1. Review of Machine Learning Concepts required for the Course.
2. What is Deep Learning? Major architectures of deep neural networks. Applications in Computer
Vision, Speech, and Natural Language Processing.
3. Training of Deep Learning Networks.
4. Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) architecture and design, Backpropagation in convolutional
layer, Transfer Learning, Building a CNN Model for CIFAR-10 Data.
5. Autoencoders, Convolutional Autoencoder (CAE) architecture and design. Unsupervised learning
using CAE.
6. Sequence Analysis using Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN), LSTM based Recurrent Networks.
Challenges in training Recurrent Networks and the Solutions, Back-Propagation Through Time
(BPTT).
7. Word Embedding Models for Vector-space Representation of Words: Word2Vec Models. Sequence
Analysis to examine Speech and Language. Building a Recurrent LSTM Model for Sentiment
Analysis using Twitter Dataset.
8. Understanding the Fundamentals of Deep Reinforcement Learning.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. M. Gopal, “Deep Learning: Core Concepts, Methods and Applications”, McGraw-Hill, 2022.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
2. I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio and A. Courville, “Deep Learning”, The MIT Press, 2016.
3. R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, “Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction”, 2nd Edition, The MIT Press,
2018.
ECE454: Optical Fiber Communication
Module 1: Optical Fibers
Overview optical communication, other forms of communication systems, Basic elements of optical fiber
links, Introduction to vector nature of light, Propagation of light, Ray model and wave model. Optical
fiber: Types, Structure and wave guiding fundamentals, Optical fiber modes and analysis, Step and
Graded Index Fibers.
Module 2: Losses in Optical Fibers
Signal degradation in Optical fiber due to dispersion and attenuation.
Module 3: Optical sources and detectors
Optical Sources: Basic light emission mechanism in semiconductors, LED and LASERs, Optical Detectors:
Basic light absorption concepts in semiconductors, photodiodes, p-i-n detectors, detector responsivity,
noise, Optical Receivers.
Module 4:
Optical Power Launching and Coupling: Lensing Scheme for coupling improvement, Fiber-to-Fiber
Joints, Splicing Techniques, Optical fiber connectors. Design Considerations of Optical fiber Systems:
Noise in detection process. Bit error rate. Optical receiver operation. Power Budget and Rise time
Budget. WDM.
Module 5: Advanced topics in Optical Communication
Basics of Optical amplifiers, Optical amplifiers and soliton-based Communication, nonlinear effects in
optical fiber links.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Textbooks
1. G. Keiser, Optical Fiber Communications, TMH.
2. Ghatak & K. Thygarajan, Introduction to Fiber Optics, Cambridge.
• Reference Books
1. J. Gowar, Optical Communication Systems, PHI.
2. J.M. Senior, Optical Fibre Communications: Principles & Practice, PHI
ECE456: High Voltage Engineering
1. Electric breakdown phenomenon in gases, liquid, and solid insulation materials, generation of high
A.C. and D.C. voltages, generation of impulse voltages and currents, measurement of high voltages
and currents, high voltage testing of electrical apparatuses, transients in power systems (lightning
and switching induced transients), insulation coordination.
2. Numerical computation of the electric field intensity in homogenous and multi-dielectric isotropic
materials by using finite element method (FEM).
3. Extra-high voltage (EHV) and ultra-high voltage (UHV) transmission systems, mitigation of audible
noise, radio interference, corona loss, and high voltage gradients.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. E. Kuffel, W. S. Zaengl, and J. Kuffel, High Voltage Engineering Fundamentals. Butterworth-
Heinemann, Oxford, 2000.
2. M. S. Naidu and V. Kamaraju, High Voltage Engineering. TMH Publications, 2000.
3. R. K. Begumudre, Extra High Voltage AC Transmission Engineering. New Age Science Ltd., 2011.
4. C. L. Wadhwa, High Voltage Engineering. New Age International Publishers, New Delhi, Second
Edition, 2007
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE457: Information Theory and Coding
Preliminaries
• Axiomatic development of Shannon’s entropy and its relevance
• Relative Entropy, fundamental inequality , mutual information
• Jensen’s inequality and other information theoretic inequalities
• Entropy rate, Asymptotic Equipartition Property (AEP), Typical Sequences
• Shannon- McMillan - Breiman Theorem.
Source coding (data compression)
• Block to variable length codes, prefix property, Kraft inequality
• Noiseless coding theorem,
• Shannon code, Huffman code and its optimality as a prefix code
• Universal Compression algorithms-
• Lempel - Ziv class universal codes – incremental parsing based LZ 78 and Sliding Window
• Lempel - Ziv (LZ 77) code
• Source coding with distortion (lossy compression),
• Differential entropy, properties and contrast with entropy
• Rate Distortion theorem and its converse
Channel coding: capacity results for discrete memoryless channel, Gaussian channel
• Joint Typicality
• Shannon’s Channel Coding Theorem and its weak and strong converse
• Error Correcting codes-
• Parity check codes, cyclic codes
• Channel Coding theorem for parity check codes
• Low density parity check code
• Polar codes (proposed for 5G)
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
Textbooks:
1. Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory, John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
2. Robert Ash, Information Theory, Reprint by Dover Publications, original 1965 by Wiley Inter
science.
ECE458: Radar Communications
Radar and Radar Equation: Introduction, Radar block diagram and operation, frequencies, applications,
types of displays, derivation of radar equation, minimum detectable signal, probability of false alarm and
threshold detection, radar cross-section, system losses, propagation characteristics over land and sea.
CW Radar – Doppler Effect, CW Radar, applications, FM – CW radar, altimeter, Multiple Frequency
Radar. Pulse Radar – MTI, Delay Line Canceller, Multiple Frequencies, Range-gated Doppler Filters, Non-
coherent MTI, Pulse Doppler Radar,
Tracking Radar- Sequential lobing, conical scanning, monopulse, phase comparison monopulse, tracking
in range, comparison of trackers.
Detection & Estimation – Introduction, Matched Filter, Detection Criteria, Detector characteristics.
Electronic countermeasure.
Phased Arrays – Basic concepts, feeds, phase shifters, frequency scan arrays, multiple beams,
applications, advantages and limitations. Navigational Aids: Direction Finder, VOR, ILS and Loran
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. M. I. Skolnik, Introduction Radar Systems, 2nd Edn, McGraw Hill Book Co.,1981
2. F. E. Terman, Radio Engineering, McGraw Hill Book Co. (For Chapter 7 Only), 4th Edn. 1955
3. Simon Kingsley and Shaun Quegan, Understanding Radar Systems, McGraw Hill Book Co., 1993.
4. Nathanson, F E, “Radar Design Principles” Scitech Publishing.
5. Hovanessian, S.A., "Radar System Design and Analysis", Artech House
6. D.K.Barton, Modern Radar Systems Analysis, Artech House, 1988.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE459: Computational Electromagnetics
1. Fundamental Concepts: Review of EM theory, Electrostatic Fields, Magnetostatic Fields, Time
varying Fields, Boundary conditions, Wave Equations, Vector Potentials, Network Theorems,
Classical Differential Equations, Classical Boundary Conditions
2. Analytical Methods: Separation of Variables, Separation of variables in rectangular coordinate and
related examples, Separation of variables in cylindrical coordinate and related examples,
Separation of variables in spherical coordinate and related examples,
3. Finite Difference Method: Basics of Finite Difference Method, Finite-Difference-Time-Domain
Method, Stability and Accuracy, Practical application examples, Absorbing boundary Conditions,
4. Finite Element Method: Introduction, Solution of Laplace’s Equation, Solution of Poisson’s
Equation
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Computation Electromagnetics with MATLAB by Matthew N. O. Sadiku, fourth edition,
CRC press
• The Finite Difference Time Domain Method for Electromagnetics by Karl S Kunz, CRC
Press.
• Theory and Computation of Electromagnetic fields by Jian-Ming Jin, John Wiley & Sons
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE460: Power System Protection and Switchgear
1. Introduction of Protection Schemes: Principles of power system protection, Faults and abnormal
operating conditions, classification of shunt faults, protection system attributes, system transducers,
introduction of current transformer and potential transformer.
2. Over-current Protection of Transmission Lines: Over-current relay and its types viz.
Instantaneous over-current relay, definite time over-current relay, inverse time over- current relay,
inverse definite minimum time over-current relay, very inverse and extremely inverse over-current
relays, directional over-current relay and their applications.
3. Distance Protection of Transmission Lines: Impedance relay, reactance relay, mho relay, effect of
arc resistance on the reach of distance relays, distance protection of three phase transmission lines,
three-stepped distance protection scheme, carrier-aided protection scheme of transmission lines.
4. Differential Protection: Simple differential protection scheme, behaviour during internal and
external faults, zone of protection of the differential relay, through fault stability, percentage
differential relay, earth leakage protection, transformer protection, percentage differential relay with
harmonic restraint, Buchholz relay, generator protection, protection under loss of excitation, induction
motor protection, single phasing, phase faults, ground faults.
5. Circuit Breakers: Isolators and circuit breakers, arc generation phenomenon, arc interruption
theories, restriking and recovery voltages, rate of rise of recovery voltage, current chopping
phenomenon, rating of circuit breaker, types of circuit breakers viz. air blast circuit breaker, vacuum
circuit breakers, oil circuit breakers, SF6 circuit breaker, MCB, ELCB/RCCB.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Textbooks
1. Fundamentals of Power System Protection by Y. G. Paithankar and S. R. Bhide, 2nd Edition, PHI
Learning.
2. Switchgear, Protection and Power Systems by S. R. Rao, Khanna Publishers.
3. Electrical Power Systems by C. L. Wadhwa, 3rd Edition, New Age International Ltd.
4. Modern Power System Analysis by D. P. Kothari and I. J. Nagrath, Tata McGraw Hill.
ECE461: HVDC Transmission
1. Introduction to Line Commutated HVDC: HVDC applications, Comparison of AC and DC
Transmission, Line-commutated HVDC components, LCC HVDC Topologies.
2. Thyristor Converters: Three-phase uncontrolled bridge, three-phase Thyristor rectifier, Analysis
of commutation overlap in Thyristor converter, Active and reactive power in a three phase
Thyristor converter, Inverter operation, Analysis of 12-Pulse converter.
3. Analysis of HVDC Converter: Equivalent circuit of rectifier bridge, Equivalent circuit of Inverter
bridge, HVDC equivalent circuit.
4. Converter Control Characteristics: HVDC V-I operating diagram, HVDC power reversal, Constant
extinction angle (CEA) control, Constant current (CC) control, modification of inverter
characteristics.
5. HVDC Interaction with AC systems: Influence of converter extinction angle, Influence of reactive
power compensation, power transfer between two AC systems, Systems dynamics with low short
circuit ratio.
6. Fault Management and HVDC System Protection: DC line faults, overvoltage protection, AC line
faults.
7. HVDC System Harmonics: Thyristor converter harmonics, Harmonic filters.
8. HVDC with Voltage Source Converters: Voltage source converter (VSC) HVDC applications and
topologies, performance and cost comparison with LCC HVDC, Introduction to multilevel VSC
converters.
9. Cables for HVDC Transmission: Underground and undersea cable transmission, different HVDC
cable types, HVDC cable insulation.
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
1. K. R. Padiyar, HVDC Power Transmission Systems. New Age International Publishers, New Delhi,
Second Edition, 2012.
2. T. Gonen, Electric Power Transmission System Engineering: Analysis and Design. CRC Press, Taylor
and Francis Group, New York, 2009.
3. D. Jovcic and K. Ahmed, High Voltage Direct Current Transmission: Converters, Systems and DC Grid.
John Wiley Publishers, 2015.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE369: Information Theory
• Axiomatic development of Shannon’s entropy and its relevance,
• Relative Entropy, fundamental inequality, mutual information
• Jensen’s inequality and other information theoretic inequalities,
• Entropy rate, Asymptotic Equipartition Property (AEP), Typical Sequences,
• Shannon- McMillan - Breiman Theorem.
• Data Compression: Block to variable length codes, prefix property, Kraft inequality,
noiseless coding theorem,
• Shannon code, Huffman code and its optimality as a prefix code,
• Variable to fixed length codes, Tunstall code and its asymptotic optimality
• Variable to variable length codes,
• Universal Compression algorithms
• Lempel - Ziv class of codes - LZ 78 and its optimality,
• Sliding Window Lempel - Ziv (LZ 77) code
• Application of LZ codes to hypothesis testing and change detection
• source coding with distortion,
• Differential entropy, properties and contrast with entropy, applications
• Rate Distortion Theory, Rate Distortion theorem and its converse,
• Channel capacity- Discrete Memoryless Channel, Gaussian channel, Joint Typicality,
• Shannon’s Channel Coding Theorem and its converse Review of point-to point digital
communication over LTI channel
• Wireless channel models
• Capacity of wireless channel
• Performance of digital modulation schemes over wireless channel
• Multi-antenna beam forming and diversity
• Multi-input multi-output (MIMO) Communication system principles
• Mutiple Access Schemes: OFDMA, CDMA
• Introduction to Multi-user systems
• Emerging technologies: 4G, 5G
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Textbooks
1. Robert Ash, "Information Theory", Reprint by Dover Publications, original 1965 by Wiley Inter
science.
2. Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas, "Elements of Information Theory", John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
ECE370: Wireless Communications
• Review of point-to point digital communication over LTI channel
• Wireless channel models
• Capacity of wireless channel
• Performance of digital modulation schemes over wireless channel
• Multi-antenna beam forming and diversity
• Multi-input multi-output (MIMO) Communication system principles
• Mutiple Access Schemes: OFDMA, CDMA
• Introduction to Multi-user systems
• Emerging technologies: 4G, 5G
RECOMMENDED BOOK(S)
• Textbooks
1. Wireless Communications by Andrea Goldsmith.
• Reference Books:
1. Fundamentals of Wireless Communications by David Tse and Pramod Viswanath (2005)
Cambridge University Press.
2. Principles of Mobile Communication by Gorden L. Stuber (2017) Springer.
3. Wireless Communications by Andreas F. Molisch (2011) Wiley.
4. Principles of Modern Wireless Communication Systems: Theory and Practice by Aditya
Jagannatham (2016) McGraw-Hill Education.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
ECE371: Detection and Estimation
1.Introduction
2. Hypothesis Testing
3. Binary Hypothesis Testing
4. Multiple Hypothesis Testing
5. Composite Hypothesis Testing
6. Signal Detection
7. Convex Statistical Distances
8. Performance Bounds for Hypothesis Testing
9. Large Deviations and Error Exponents for Hypothesis Testing
10. Sequential and Quickest Change Detection
11. Detection of Random Processes
12. Bayesian Parameter Estimation
13. Minimum Variance Unbiased Estimation
14. Information Inequality and Cramér–Rao Lower Bound
15. Maximum Likelihood Estimation
16. Signal Estimation
RECOMMENDED TEXT BOOK(S)
• Textbooks:
1. Statistical Inference For Engineers And Data Scientists by P. Moulin and V. Veeravalli,
Cambridge University Press (2019).
2. Principles of Signal Detection and Parameter Estimation by B. C. Levy, Springer (2008).
3. Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing, Volume I: Estimation by S. M. Kay, Prentice
Hall (1993).
4. Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing, Volume II: Detection by S. M. Kay, Prentice
Hall (1993).
5. An Introduction to Signal Detection and Estimation by H. V. Poor, Springer (1998).
6. Detection, Estimation, and Modulation Theory: Part 1 by H. L. Van Trees, John Wiley and
Sons (2004).
ECE372: Modern Control Systems
1. State Space Analysis and Design in Continuous Time: Controllability and observability, State
feedback and state estimator design, Pole placement and observer design, Full-state feedback
control.
2. Introduction to Digital Control and Discrete-Time Systems and Difference Equations:
Basics of digital control systems, Advantages and disadvantages of digital control, Sampled-data
systems and discretization of continuous-time systems, Discrete-time signals and sequences, Z-
transform and its properties, Transfer functions in the Z-domain.
3. Digital Controllers and State-Space Analysis in Discrete-Time: Design of digital controllers
using difference equations, PID controllers in the discrete-time domain, Discrete-time system
modeling using state-space representation, Controllability and observability in discrete-time,
State feedback and state estimator design.
4. Lyapunov Stability Analysis: Introduction to Lyapunov's Direct Method, Lyapunov stability
definitions: asymptotic stability, stability in the sense of Lyapunov, and exponential stability,
Lyapunov functions and their role in stability analysis.
5. Kalman Filter: Overview of Kalman filtering and its significance, The classical linear Kalman
filter for linear systems, Application of the Kalman filter to estimate the state of linear dynamic
systems.
RECOMMENDED TEXT BOOK(S)
• Textbooks:
1. K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering. Prentice Hall India Learning Private Limited, 5th edition,
2015.
2. K. Ogata, Discrete-Time Control Systems. Prentice Hall India Learning Private Limited, 2nd
edition, 2005.
• Reference Books:
1. Dorf and Bishop, Modern Control Systems. Pearson, 13th Edition, 2016.
2. Karl J. Åstrӧm and Bjӧrn Wittenmark, Computer Controlled Systems: Theory and Design. Dover
Publication, 3rd edition, 2012.
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
3. Panos J. Antsaklis and Anthony N. Michel, A Linear Systems Primer. Birkhäuser, 2007th Edition,
2007
4. Franklin, Powell and Emami-Naeini, Feedback Control of Dynamic Systems. Pearson, 8th Edition,
2018.
5. Franklin G. F., Powell J. D., Workman M., Digital Control of Dynamic Systems. Addison-Wesley,
3rd Edition, 1997.
ECE373: Wireless Network Security
1. Security in cellular Devices: Security in GSM, LTE, and 5G networks, Security issues in
mobile devices and femtocells.
2. Security in WLAN, WMAN, WiMax: Security goals, Security issues, Threat Types,
Countermeasures
3. Security in Ad hoc vehicular Networks: Architecture, Communication Protocols, Privacy and
Secure Positioning
4. Security in wireless sensor networks: secure key managements, secure routing protocols,
location privacy protections, secure data aggregation, security architecture, cryptographic
approaches, resilience on key management, trust management.
5. Security in wireless mesh networks: Vulnerabilities, defence mechanisms, security
standards and products
6. Security in RFID Networks: Security requirements, Hardware based solutions, protocol-
based solutions, security in commercial RFID devices.
7. Introduction to Cryptography: Introduction to cryptography, Cryptographic Techniques:
Plain Text and Cipher Text, Substitution Techniques, Transposition Techniques, Encryption
and Decryption, Symmetric and Asymmetric Key Cryptography, Steganography, Key Range
and Key Size, Possible Types of Attacks, Algorithms for encryption and decryption.
8. Physical Layer Security: Need pf Physical layer security, Physical-layer threats, jamming
techniques, eavesdropping, performance evaluation with and without CSI.
RECOMMENDED TEXT BOOK(S)
• Text Books:
1. Lei Chen, Jiahuang Ji, Zihong Zhang (auth.) - Wireless Network Security Theories and
Applications-Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2013).
2. Panos C. Lekkas, Randall K. Nichols - Wireless security models, threats, and solutions- McGraw-
Hill Professional (2001).
3. Yulong Zou, Jia Zhu (Auth.) - Physical-Layer Security for Cooperative Relay Networks - Springer
International Publishing (2016).
• Reference Books:
1. Wolfgang Osterhage - Wireless Network Security_ Second Edition-CRC Press (2018).
2. Matthieu Bloch, João Barros - Physical-Layer Security From Information Theory to Security
Engineering-Cambridge University Press (2011).
3. Yang Xiao, Xuemin (Sherman) Shen, Ding-Zhu Du - Wireless Network Security- Springer (2007).
ECE374: Reconfigurable Computing
1. Introduction to reconfigurable computing: General Purpose Computing, Domain Specific
Computing, Application Specific Computing, Reconfigurable Computing, Fields of application.
2. Reconfigurable Architectures: Simple Programmable Logic Devices, Complex Programmable
Logic Device, Field Programmable Gate Arrays, Fine-Grained and Coarse- Grained
Reconfigurable architectures.
3. Implementation and Programming Reconfigurable Systems: Integration, FPGA Design Flow,
Logic Synthesis, Static reconfigurable systems, Run Time Reconfiguration.
4. High-Level Synthesis and Mapping: Modelling, Temporal Partitioning Algorithms, Mapping to
DEPARTMENT
OF
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING
LUTs of Different Input Sizes, Mapping to Complex Logic Blocks, Mapping Logic to Embedded
Memory Blocks, Mapping to Macrocells.
5. Temporal Placement: Offline Temporal Placement, Online Temporal Placement, Managing the
Device’s Free Space with Empty Rectangles, Clustering, Partition-based Placement.
6. On-line communication: Direct Communication, Communication Over Third Party, Bus-based
communication, Network on Chip, The Dynamic Network on Chip.
7. Reconfiguration Management and Partial reconfiguration design: Configuration Architectures-
Single-context, Multi-context, Partially Reconfigurable, Relocation and Defragmentation,
Pipeline reconfigurable, Block Reconfigurable, Partial Reconfiguration on Virtex Devices,
Creating Partially Reconfigurable Designs.
RECOMMENDED TEXT BOOK(S)
• Text Books:
1 Christophe Bobda- Introduction to Reconfigurable Computing:
Architectures, A lgorithms and Applications, Springer Dordrecht, 2007.
2 Scott Hauck, André DeHon, Reconfigurable Computing - The Theory and Practice of
FPGA Based Computation, The Morgan Kaufmann Series in Systems on Silicon, 2008.
• Reference Books
1. R Vaidyanathan, Trahan Jerry, Dynamic Reconfiguration: Architectures and
Algorithms, L Kluwer Academic, 2003.
ECE375: Quantum Computing
1. Quantum Axioms
2. Quantum Gates
3. Quantum Algorithms: Deutsch-Jozsa Algorithm, Quantum phase estimation, QFT, Shor’s
factorization of numbers, Grover’s algorithm, HHL Quantum Algorithm.
4. Computability, complexity theory.
5. Quantum Error Correction Codes: CSS, Stabilizer codes
6. Quantum Cryptography: QKD
7. General Quantum Axioms, Entanglement
8. Quantum State Detection.
9. Quantum Machine Learning
10. Programming based on Qiskit
RECOMMENDED TEXT BOOK(S)
• Text Books:
1. Kaye, Laflamme, Mosca, Introduction to Quantum Computing, Oxford 2007.
2. Rieffel and Polak, Quantum Computing, MIT Press, 2011.
3. Nielsen and Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information, 2000.
4. W. Scherer, Math of Quantum Computing-an Introduction, Springer, 2019.
5. M. Schuld and F. Petruccione, Machine Learning with Quantum Computers, 2nd ed. Springer,
2021