DEPARTMENT OF
ELECTRICAL
ENGINEERING
ANALYTICAL THINKING, PHYSICAL AND
CREATIVITY, PROBLEM-SOLVING: EMOTIONAL WELL-BEING:
Why Shiv Nadar University?
with research programs, internships, a vibrant campus life on our
entrepreneurial opportunities, and more, 286-acre green campus is
our curriculum teaches key skills designed just for that
Shiv Nadar University is a multidisciplinary research university
established in 2011 by Mr. Shiv Nadar, one of Asia's foremost
philanthropists and a pioneer of the technological revolution in
India. The four Schools at the university offer undergraduate, JOBS, HIGHER STUDIES
postgraduate, and doctoral degrees in Engineering, Natural ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE: OR START-UPS:
Sciences, Humanities and Social Sciences, and Management an our faculty come from we prepare our students
Entrepreneurship. It is the youngest university recognised as an top institutions in India for a variety of aspirations
Institution of Eminence by the Government of India, a distinct and the world
category of higher education institutions that "strive to become the
top hundred Institutions in the world over time". In the
Government's National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF), the
university has been the youngest institution in the 'Top 100' overall Why
list for the last five years. Shiv Nadar
Institution of
Eminence?
Why Study Electrical and Computer Engineering
at Shiv Nadar University?
The Department of Electrical Engineering aims to prepare to align the program with current industry trends and
the students for the challenges in Electronics, Electrical, academic research. In addition, the students can optionally
Communication and Computer Engineering areas in industry earn minors in other disciplines of the university. The faculty
and academia through a well-structured curriculum. It offers members are actively engaged in research with challenging
undergraduate program in Electrical and Computer Engineer- problems, relevant to industry and academia. The depart-
ing and Doctoral Programs. Currently, there is also an M.Tech ment continuously upgrades its experimental and computa-
Program in VLSI and Embedded Systems. The curriculum is tional facilities. It engages in consultancy work, inter-de-
divided into three categories: Mandatory core courses, which partmental and industrial collaboration, and academic
lay the foundations for any engineering discipline, elective collaboration with universities in India and abroad. Faculty
courses and projects. Students are free to choose the and students are encouraged to participate in national and
electives based on their interests. international conferences, seminars and workshops. This
provides them an opportunity to interact with professionals
The program encourages students to participate in hands-on
in their areas.
projects and has structured and well-equipped laboratories
Curriculum
The core curriculum is revisited and revised regularly to meet current
research and industry developments. Several new courses in
computer engineering, communication engineering, and control
systems have been introduced in the curriculum to align the students
with the current industry requirements and trends worldwide. The
courses offered include Electrical Machine Drives, Power Electronics,
Analog and Digital VLSI Design, Computer Organization, Data
Structure, Semiconductor Device Physics, Signal Processing, Wireless
communication, Information Theory, Quantum Computing,
Microwave Devices, Embedded & IoT systems, AI/ML applications,
Control System, Introduction to Robotics etc.
▪ Curricula designed to allow students to have insight into the subject and the
B. Tech. (Electrical
ability to relate theory to practice
& Computer
▪ UG students are also encouraged to earn a minor degree in the areas of their
Engineering) interest along with a B. Tech.
M. Tech. ▪ Master of Technology (M.Tech.) in VLSI Design and Embedded Systems
▪ Ph.D. students can apply twice in an academic year (Spring and Monsoon
semesters).
Ph.D. (Electrical
▪ Selection based on minimum qualification as announced on the university
Engineering) website and performance in the Shiv Nadar IoE Ph.D. entrance examination.
▪ All successful full-time Ph.D. students are offered a tuition fee waiver and a
generous monthly stipend to cover their living expenses.
State-of-the-art Laboratories
The Department has state-of-the-art
UG Teaching ▪ Electrical Machine Lab
laboratories with sophisticated instru-
Laboratories ▪ Power Electronics Lab
ments, software, and computational
▪ Project Lab
and
facilities. Domain expert faculty members ▪ Embedded Electronics Lab
Research
handle each laboratory with the active ▪ Communication Engineering Lab
participation of the laboratory technical Facilities ▪ Digital Signal Processing Lab
▪ Microwave Lab
staff. The department also encourages its
▪ Electronics Lab 1 & 2
Ph.D. students to participate in under-
▪ Measurement & Control Lab
graduate laboratories as part of academic
▪ VLSI Lab
training. ▪ Microcontroller Lab
▪ Energy Lab
▪ Organic and Flexible Electronics lab
▪ Nanoelectronics Computation Laboratory
(NCL)
Electrical Engineering Faculty
The Department has qualified and experienced faculty in all the discipline
domains. They are actively engaged in research with challenging problems
relevant to industry and academia. As per the university policy, all the
faculty hold doctoral degrees from reputed institutions within India and
foreign universities. The department believes in inter-departmental faculty
interaction and collaboration with industry and universities within and
outside India. This helps in maintaining state-of-the-art infrastructure in
teaching and research labs.
Department of Electrical Engineering Faculty
DR. VINOD SHARMA DR. GOVIND SHARMA
Head of the Department and Professor, Ph.D., Carnegie Mellon University, USA Professor, Ph.D., University of Southern California, Los Angeles
Research Interests: Communication Networks, Wireless Networks, Information Research Interests: Digital Communication, Wireless Communication, Digital
Theory Signal Processing, Statistical Signal Processing, Detection and Estimation Theory,
Image and Video Signal Processing
DR. DINKAR PRASAD DR. VIJAY KUMAR CHAKKA
Professor, Ph.D., IIT Kharagpur, India Professor, Ph.D., NIT-Trichy, India
Research Interests: Electrical Machines and Drives, Power Electronics Research Interests: Communication Engineering, Signal Processing, Deep
learning on Graph neural networks
DR. RAKESH BANSAL DR. G NAVEEN BABU
Professor, Ph.D., University of Connecticut, Storrs Associate Professor, Ph.D., JIIT-Noida, India
Research Interests: Information Theory, Sequential Change Detection, Research Interests: Electromagnetic Engineering, Microwave Tubes,
Detection theory, Statistical Robustness Antennas, Metamaterial based electromagnetic structures, Machine
learning, Deep learning
DR. SONAL SINGHAL DR. VENKATNARAYAN HARIHARAN
Associate Professor, Ph.D., IIT-Roorkee, India Associate Professor, Ph.D., IIT-Bombay
Research Interests: Ageing-aware novel CMOS logic architectures, In-Memory Research Interests: Modelling of semiconductor devices and on-chip
computing architecture, spiking neural networks, and development of interconnects, CAD algorithms for VLSI, Mixed-signal VLSI design,
low-power sensor nodes for Internet-of-Things applications. Technology-circuit interactions
DR. ATUL VIR SINGH DR. AMITABH CHATTERJEE
Associate Professor, Ph.D., IIT-Delhi, India Associate Professor, Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara, USA
Research Interests: MEMS Technology, Microelectronics, Semiconductor Research Interests: Modelling and Simulation of Semiconductor Devices
Materials and Devices and Circuits, WBG Power Electronics, TCAD of Advanced Materials &
Scaled Devices, VLSI - Power & Analog , Ultrafast Lasers & Electronics
DR. MADHUR DEO UPADHAYAY DR. KAMAL SINGH
Associate Professor, Ph.D., IIT-Delhi, India Assistant Professor, Ph.D, IIT-Bombay
Research Interests: Active and passive circuits for RF & Microwave, RFID, Research Interests: Multi-antenna Communication systems for
EMC/EMI, Antennas: Passive & Active Antenna, OAM Antenna, MIMO 5G/6GWireless, Information-theoretic aspects of Wireless
Antenna Communications
DR. AMIT BAKSHI DR. HIMANSHU SEKHAR SAHU
Associate Head & Associate Professor, Ph.D., IIT-Bombay Assistant Professor, Ph.D., IIT-Guwahati
Research Interests: Short-circuit mechanical strength analysis of power Research Interests: Integration of Renewable Sources with the Grid,
transformers, Low-frequency electromagnetic analysis, Homotopy analysis Photovoltaic Power System, Distributed Generation and Power Quality,
method to solve nonlinear differential equations Renewable Energy
DR. JITENDRA PRAJAPATI DR. KAMAL AGARWAL
Assistant Professor, Ph.D., IIT-Guwahati Assistant Professor - Ph.D., IIT Delhi
Research Interests: Terahertz Radiation, Terahertz Antennas, Research Interests: Physical layer layer aspects of wireless communication for 5G and
Photoconductive and Photomixing Antennas, Terahertz Applications, 6G, Wireless powered communication, Aerial communication, Underwater wireless
optical communication, Next generation multiple access, Device to Device
Terahertz Sensing, Microwave Devices and Antennas
communication Reconfigurable Intelligent surface, Backscatter communication,
Integrated sensing and communication.
DR. UPENDRA KUMAR PANDEY MR. AAKASH SINHA
Assistant Professor, Ph.D., University of Calabria, Italy Assistant Professor of Practice, M.S., Carnegie Mellon University, USA
Research Interests: MEMS Technology, Microelectronics, Semiconductor Research Interests: Robots, Drones, Driverless Cars, and Machine
Materials and Devices Learning
DR. ROHIT SINGH DR. RAKESH PALISETTY
Assistant Professor, Ph.D., IIT-Indore Assistant Professor, Ph.D., IIT Patna
Research Interests: Nanoelectronics, Embedded Systems, Internet of Research Interests: VLSI architectural design, Field-programmable gate
Things array (FPGA)-based system design, VLSI for baseband wireless
communication system, Digital Beamforming, ASIC Implementation
DR. SANDEEP SONI DR. SUBHENDU BIKASH SANTRA
Assistant Professor, Ph.D., IIT (BHU) Varanasi Assistant Professor, Ph.D., Jadavpur University
Research Interests: Nonlinear Control Systems, Multiagent Systems, Control Research Interests: DC-DC Converter Topologies for EV and PV
Applications to Robotics and Power Electronics applications, High power density converter, Microgrid Control,
PMSM/BLDC Motor drive
OUR Program
The Opportunities for Undergraduate Research (OUR) • Non Fullerene Acceptor based Organic Solar Cells using • Design of Reliability-Aware CMOS-based synaptic
program at Shiv Nadar University aims to give undergraduate PTB7 as donor circuits
students hands-on experience conducting research and doing
• Interface engineering at Hole Transport Layers and • Design, Implementation and Aging analysis of i-SRAM:
independent work under faculty supervision. By participating
Perovskite layer for efficient and stable PSC In-Memory Computing Architecture
in the OUR program, students are encouraged to satisfy their
• Utilising a ternary blend of PM6 (Donor) and Y6 and CF3 • Developing Physical Design of I2C Controller
natural inquisitiveness and grow their expertise in research
as an acceptor material for Organic Solar Cells
methodology. As a result, the students gain experience in • RIS-Assisted D2D Communication with Transceiver
research from their early days. • Self-assembled anti-Naphthalene bisbenzimidazoles Hardware Impairments
based ETL for Perovskite Solar Cells
• Designing of Low Power Arduino-Based Sensor Node
Some of the recent OUR projects include the following:
• Maximising power generation of partially shaded PV
• Design of an Embedded Edge-processing Water Quality
• Real-time Carrier Synchronization in PC-based SDR
arrays using optimal configuration
Monitoring System
Systems
• Tracking of global MPP of a partially shaded PV array
• IoT Enabled FreeRTOS Based Air Quality Monitoring
• Filtenna Design For 5G Communication
using voltage and current perturbation
System
• RF Carrier Combiner For Satellite
• Generation of a 50V high frequency (100 kHz) square
• Constant-Current Constant-Voltage Charging System
• Reservoir computing models for Machine Learning wave from 230V mains supply
with a Two-Switch Forward Converter
• Compact bandpass filters for 5G communication systems • Thyristor-based starter for separately excited dc motor
Pathway to Progress
Our undergraduate and postgraduate degrees have enabled our students to
enter successful careers. Electrical Engineering professionals can find
employment in the public sector (DRDO, HAL, NTPC, BHEL etc.) and private
companies (HP, Oracle, Cognizant, HCL, Tata Powers, Silicon labs etc.)
Entrepreneurial students can develop new hardware and software products
through their start-ups. The Atal Incubation Center at the university
encourages such activities.
Many of our students have pursued Master's and Ph.D. degrees in global
universities upon completing their B.Tech studies. By acquiring degrees from
prestigious institutions in India and abroad, our students are assuredly on the
pathway to progress.
Student Outcomes
Over the years, the department has attracted a talented cohort of
undergraduate and graduate students. Many of our graduated
students obtained admission and fellowships for Masters, Ph.D. and
Post-Doctoral Fellowship in reputed universities/organisations
around the globe like Weizmann Institute of Science, Mayo Clinic
Rochester. Many of our bachelor students also obtained job offers
from industrial giants such as McKinsey, CommVault, HP Inc, Dell &
Cognizant/IRDETO/Byju's, Champions Semiconductors/Lutron
Electronics/Encore Capital/L&T Tech.
Admissions Eligibility
Bachelor of Technology
Program Selection Criteria Class 12th Eligibility
Route 1 - JEE Mains 2024/ 2023
Electrical and Route 2 - SNUSAT Score + APT Aggregate of Physics,
Computer Route 3 - CUET 2024 Score + Interview Chemistry and Maths
Engineering must be >=65%
Route 4 - Valid College Board SAT Score + Interview
Route 5 - Valid ACT Score + Interview
Scan Here For More Details:
Contact Details
Scan Here For More Details:
Head, Department of Electrical Engineering
at hod.ee@snu.edu.in
Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence
NH 91, Tehsil Dadri, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh - 201314, India
Ph: +91-120-7170100, +91-120-2662002