DEPARTMENT OF
CIVIL
ENGINEERING
ANALYTICAL THINKING, PHYSICAL AND
CREATIVITY, PROBLEM-SOLVING: EMOTIONAL WELL-BEING:
Why Shiv Nadar University?
with research programs, internships, a vibrant campus life on our
entrepreneurial opportunities, and more, 286-acre green campus is
our curriculum teaches key skills designed just for that
Shiv Nadar University is a multidisciplinary research university
established in 2011 by Mr. Shiv Nadar, one of Asia's foremost
philanthropists and a pioneer of the technological revolution in
India. The four Schools at the university offer undergraduate, JOBS, HIGHER STUDIES
postgraduate, and doctoral degrees in Engineering, Natural ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE: OR START-UPS:
Sciences, Humanities and Social Sciences, and Management an our faculty come from we prepare our students
Entrepreneurship. It is the youngest university recognised as an top institutions in India for a variety of aspirations
Institution of Eminence by the Government of India, a distinct and the world
category of higher education institutions that "strive to become the
top hundred Institutions in the world over time". In the
Government's National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF), the
university has been the youngest institution in the 'Top 100' Overall Why
list for the last five years. Shiv Nadar
Institution of
Eminence?
Why Study Civil Engineering at
Shiv Nadar University?
The Department of Civil Engineering is a department for the working tirelessly on the principle of “think globally, act
21st century where the intellectual vigor of the students is locally” to shape future-ready leaders who will meet the
nurtured by offering academic freedom through creative, challenges arising in our interconnected world. Keeping in
cutting-edge, and industry-oriented curricula. With mind the importance of industrial interaction and
innovative and engaging teaching methods assisted by networking, the department organizes various expert talks,
state-of-the-art facilities, the department endeavors to workshops, and industrial training/visits for its students
mold the students into excellent professional engineers by throughout the academic year. Meritorious students are
training them in different aspects of civil engineering offered generous scholarships, financial assistance, tuition
through modern, technological, analytical and fee waiver, internships, and other opportunities to help
computational courses. deserving students achieve the finest education.
As proposed in National Education Policy 2020, As a testimony of academic rigor and excellence, the
“mathematics and mathematical thinking will be very Department of Civil Engineering has received the
important for India’s future and India’s leadership role in the prestigious “Fund for Improvement of S&T Infrastructure
numerous upcoming fields and professions”. The (FIST) – 2022” grant from the Department of Science and
Department of Civil Engineering recognizes that and is Technology, Government of India.
Curriculum
The Department of Civil Engineering at Shiv Nadar Institution of
Eminence has a dynamic curriculum revised regularly to
incorporate recent industry and research developments. Great
emphasis is given to objective-based learning and hands-on
training with a core motive to develop and improve students'
skillsets. Currently, the department successfully runs the B. Tech.
and Ph.D. programs.
In August 2022, the Civil Engineering Department revamped its
UG curriculum and integrated modern technological topics such
as Remote Sensing, Machine Learning, Sensors, and Risk
Analysis. The department strongly encourages the UG students
to complete one specialization in “Sustainable Infrastructure
Systems,” “Water, Environment and Climate,” and “Urban
Networks Systems” as a part of their B. Tech. degree.
• Annual intake through SNUSAT or JEE-mains score.
• All semester courses are designed to allow students to explore and enhance core
competencies.
B. Tech. (Civil
• Offers specializations in “Sustainable Infrastructure Systems,” “Water,
Engineering)
Environment and Climate,” and “Urban Networks Systems”.
• UG students are also encouraged to earn a minor degree in the areas of their
interest along with a B. Tech.
• Ph.D. students can apply twice in an academic year (Spring and Monsoon
semesters).
Ph.D. (Civil • Applicants must have a minimum 7 CGPA for application and are selected based
on their performance in the Shiv Nadar IoE Ph.D. entrance examination.
Engineering)
• All successful full-time Ph.D. students are offered a tuition fee waiver and
a generous monthly stipend to cover their living expenses.
• The Ph.D. program is generally for 5 years, and students must stay on campus.
State-of-the-art
• Concrete Technology Laboratory
Laboratories • Experimental Soil Mechanics Laboratory
UG
• Fluid Mechanics Laboratory
Laboratories
• Strength of Materials Laboratory
The Department of Civil Engineering has
• Tansportation Engineering Laboratory
developed several state-of-the-art
laboratories with sophisticated • Civil Engineering Software Laboratory
UG and
instruments. Domain expert faculty • Environmental Engineering Laboratory
PG-Research
members head each laboratory with a • Geoinformatcs Laboratory
Laboratories
supportive and efficient laboratory
• Hydraulic Engineering Laboratory
technical staff. The department has a
high teacher-to-student ratio, enabling • Advanced Materials and Building Energy
Laboratory
the faculty members to mentor each
• Theoretical Geomechanics Laboratory
student toward achieving excellence in
PG-Research
• Air Quality Laboratory
learning.
Laboratories
• Disaster Management Laboratory
• Air Quality Sampling Laboratory
• Water Management Field Laboratory
Civil Engineering Specializations
SUSTAINABLE WATER,
INFRASTRUCTURE ENVIRONMENT &
SYSTEMS CLIMATE
The United Nations accepted 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG)” as the “shared
blueprint for peace and prosperity” in 2015. As a part of which, sustainable
7affordable and 12industry
development of built and natural environments along with economic well-being of clean energy 9i i n n d n u o s v t a r ti y o n and 6c a l n e d a s n a w ni a t t a e t r ion i i n n n fr o a v s a t t r io u n t u a r n e d
infrastruture CIVIL
people are concomitant cardinal goals for modern society.
ENGINEERING
3good health @ SHIV NADAR IoE 13climate
and well-being action
The Department of Civil Engineering at Shiv Nadar IoE realizes that it is our basic
responsibility to provide learning opportunities to our students in various aspects of 4q ed u u a c li a t t y ion 17p fo a r r t t n h e e r g s o h a ip l s s
sustainable Civil engineering practices which should be duly supported by modern tools
and technologies e.g. sensor technology, risk analysis, machine learning, IoT, etc. In
order to provide multidisciplinary UG education to our students, the current UG course
curriculum is being redesigned to offer the following three broad specializations:
1. Sustainable Infrastructure Systems URBAN NETWORK
SYSTEMS
2. Water, Environment and Climate
3. Urban Network Systems 11Sustainable and 15life on
communities land
Department of Civil
Engineering Faculty
The Department has highly skilled faculty members with diverse
backgrounds covering modern tools and sustainability aspects, who
have expanded the scope of teaching and research beyond
traditional civil engineering. All the faculty members have received
their Ph.D. from IITs and reputed foreign universities. Several
department faculty members have received research grants from the
Government of India and allied agencies to conduct research in
contemporary civil engineering domains.
Department of Civil Engineering Faculty
DR. GYAN VIKASH DR. GOPAL DAS SINGHAL
Associate Professor and Head, PhD IIT Kanpur Associate Professor and Associate Head, PhD IIT Roorkee
Specialization: Geotechnical Engineering, Computational Specialization: Water Resources Engineering, Hydraulic structures, River
geomechanics, Constitutive modelling of geomaterials, Physics based - hydraulics, Smart agricultural water management.
data driven modelling in geomechanics.
DR. ATRI NATH DR. ELLORA PADHI
Assistant Professor, PhD IIT Kharagpur Assistant Professor, PhD IIT Kharagpur
Specialization: Structural Engg, Computational mechanics, Steel structures, Specialization: Water Resources Engineering, Turbulence in open channel
fatigue and fracture, Material modelling flow, Sediment transport phenomena, River meandering.
DR. GHANSHYAM PAL DR. GURMAIL BENIPAL
Associate Professor, Ph.D., University of Mississippi, USA Professor, PhD IIT Delhi
Specialization: Structural Engineering, Building physics and Specialization: Structural Engineering, Constitutive modelling and
sustainability, Novel cementitious composites, Multiscale numerical structural theory, Damage elasto-plasticity and
modelling. Thermo-chemo-visco-elasticity of concrete.
DR. HITESH UPRETI DR. SHALINI RANKAVAT
Assistant Professor, PhD IIT Roorkee Assistant Professor, PhD IIT Delhi
Specialization: Water Resources Engineering, Remote sensing in Specialization: Transportation Engineering, Transport planning and policy,
agriculture and water resources, Smart agricultural water management, Traffic safety, Public transport and NMV planning.
Irrigation hydrology.
DR. JAGABANDHU DIXIT DR. SUMEDHA MOHARANA
Associate Professor, PhD IIT Bombay Associate Professor, PhD IIT Delhi
Specialization: Earthquake Engineering and Structural Dynamics, Natural Specialization: Structural Engineering, Piezoelectric impedance based
hazards and disaster risk reduction, Disaster mitigation and emergency structural health monitoring, Smart materials, Building science.
management.management, Irrigation hydrology.
DR. MANOJ KUMAR SINGH DR. SUSANT KUMAR PADHI
Assistant Professor, PhD IIT Delhi Assistant Professor, PhD IIT Guwahati
Specialization: Structural Engg, Adaptive thermal comfort, Occupant’s Specialization: Environmental Engineering, Biological &
behavior and built energy interaction, Building energy simulation, Physico-chemical processes, Membrane technology for wastewater
High-performance building envelopes treatment, Solid waste management.
DR. SAILESH NARAYAN BEHERA
Associate Professor, PhD IIT Kanpur
Specialization: Environmental Engineering, Air quality monitoring and aerosol
modelling, Policy evaluation of pollution control, Pollution scenarios with
water-air-soil interactions.
OUR Program
The Opportunities for Undergraduate Research (OUR) • A finite element modelling approach to determine
program at Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence aims to the shape and pattern of recycled interlock
give students hands-on experience in conducting pavement
research and doing independent work under faculty • Estimation of development length in a smooth and
supervision. By participating in the OUR program, rough narrow channel
students are encouraged to satisfy their natural
• Study to understand the thermal performance of
inquisitiveness and grow their expertise in research
a non-air-conditioned hostel room of Shiv Nadar IoE
methodology. As a result, students have earned plaudits
• Numerical analysis of flow in a narrow open channel
in the field of research from their early years in
with various flow depth
undergraduate studies. Some of the recent OUR projects
include the following: • Mapping and assessment of surface water resources
in GB Nagar district using remote sensing
• Crop monitoring in the agricultural fields using
satellite remote sensing techniques • A value of information approach for urban resilience
and sustainability: a case study on Parvati Valley
• Modelling of crop yield using the AquaCrop model
and data collected in agricultural fields • Modelling of effective thermal properties of Phase
Change Materials (PCM) – Cement mortar
• Analysis of Crop Water Stress Index (CWSI) and its
composites
modelling using soft computing techniques
Pathway to Progress
Our undergraduate and postgraduate degrees have enabled our students to enter a
wide range of successful careers. Civil engineering professionals can find employment in
both public (CPWD, NHAI, BRO, MES, Railway, Ministry of Water Resources, BIS,
DRDO, CPCB, etc.) and Public Sector Undertakings (GAIL, HAL, NTPC, NPCIL, etc.)
Students can join government jobs and PSUs through the GATE (Graduate Aptitude Test
in Engineering) and UPSC (ESE) exams.
In Civil Engineering. entrepreneurial students can start their careers as building
planners, consulting engineers, quality assurance engineers, etc. in an organization and
develop their own start-up after acquiring sufficient experience.
Many of our students have gone on to pursue M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in global
universities upon completing their B. Tech. By acquiring degrees from prestigious
institutions in India and abroad, our students are assuredly on the pathway to progress.
Student Outcomes
Over the years, the Civil Engineering Department has attracted a
talented cohort of undergraduate and graduate students. Many of
our graduated students got admission and fellowships for doing
Masters and Ph.D. in well-reputed universities around the globe,
such as Stanford University, the University of Texas A & M, TU Delft,
University of Leeds, University of Waterloo, University Stuttgart,
Arizona State University, etc. Many of our bachelor students also got
job offers from industrial giants such as the Shapoorji Pallonji Group,
Larson and Turbo, Tata projects, Saint-Gobain, RMS (Risk
Management Solutions), RITES Ltd, etc.
Admissions Eligibility
Bachelor of Technology
Program Selection Criteria Class 12th Eligibility
Route 1 - JEE Mains 2024/ 2023
Civil Engineering Route 2 - SNUSAT Score + APT Aggregate of Physics,
Chemistry and Maths
Route 3 - CUET 2024 Score + Interview
must be >=65%
Route 4 - Valid College Board SAT Score + Interview
Route 5 - Valid ACT Score + Interview
Scan Here For More Details:
Contact Details
MR. SACHDEV SINGH
Senior Executive Assistant, Department of Civil Engineering
at sachdev.singh@snu.edu.in
DR. SHALINI RANKAVAT
UG advisor
Department of Civil Engineering, Scan Here For More Details:
at shalini.rankavat@snu.edu.in
Head, Department of Civil Engineering,
at hod.civil@snu.edu.in
Shiv Nadar Institution of Eminence
NH 91, Tehsil Dadri, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh - 201314, India
Ph: +91-120-7170100, +91-120-2662002