DEPARTMENT OF
MECHANICAL
ENGINEERING
ANALYTICAL THINKING, PHYSICAL AND EMOTIONAL
Why Shiv Nadar CREATIVITY, PROBLEM-SOLVING WELL-BEING
with research programs, internships, a vibrant campus life on our
University? entrepreneurial opportunities, and more, 286-acre green campus is
our curriculum teaches essential skills designed just for that
Shiv Nadar University, is a multidisciplinary research university
established in 2011 by Mr. Shiv Nadar, one of Asia's foremost
JOBS, HIGHER STUDIES
philanthropists and a pioneer of the technological revolution in
OR START-UPS
ACADEMIC EXCELLENCE:
India. The four Schools at the university offer undergraduate,
our faculty come from we prepare our students
postgraduate, and doctoral degrees in Engineering, Natural
top institutions in India for a variety of aspirations
Sciences, Humanities and Social Sciences, and Management &
and the world
Entrepreneurship. It is the youngest university recognised to be an
Institution of Eminence by the Government of India. The Institution
of Eminence is a distinct category of higher education institutions
that "strive to become the top hundred Institutions in the world
over time". In the government's National Institutional Ranking Why
Framework (NIRF), the university has been the youngest institution Shiv Nadar
in the 'Top 100 Overall List’ for the last five years.
University?
Why Study Mechanical Engineering
at Shiv Nadar University?
Mechanical engineering is a versatile engineering discipline. It deals with solid and
fluid mechanics, design, materials, and manufacturing principles. It also provides a
flavour of other fields like chemical, electrical, civil, aerospace, and computer
science. This multidisciplinary skill set enables a mechanical engineer to design
and develop systems for various applications like hybrid and electric cars, power
generation using renewable energy sources, robots, bio-medical devices,
aerospace, etc.
Highlights of Mechanical Engineering Department
• The department has dedicated faculty members with • Students have access to the 3DEXPERIENCE
excellent academic backgrounds. The current platform package at the Shiv Nadar IoE Dassault
student-to-faculty strength ratio is ~ 17:1. Systemes Center of Excellence (SDC).
• The department has state-of-the-art research facilities. • Our placement percentage has been consistently
The departmental research labs include mechatronics, over 90% for many years.
robotics, surface engineering, and advanced manufac- • Every year, our students secure masters/PhD
turing labs, to name a few. admissions with funding from leading universities in
• Undergraduate students are encouraged to participate India and worldwide.
in research projects from the second year. They also • The Department runs multiple student clubs for
work on sponsored research projects by DST, DRDO, active participation in global competitions by the
CSIR, and Dassault Systèmes, among others. American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME),
• Students benefit from minor degrees. Popular minor Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), etc. Some of
degree options are Management, Computer Science & the key achievements include:
Engineering, Electrical/Electronics & Communication
Engineering and Physics.
Year 2023-24 Year 2021-22
1. The student's chapter of ASME SNU has been awarded In the ASME E-fest, the university teams excelled some
in two categories: noteworthy achievements include:
a. ASME India Most Significant Membership Growth 1. IAM3D Team: Global Rank of 2
Award 2. SDC Team: Global Rank of 7, National Rank of 2
b. ASME India Faculty All-Star Supporter Award (Dr. 3. HPVC Team: 14th rank globally.
Sumit Tiwari)
Year 2020-21
Year 2022-23
In the ASME E-fest, the university got:
1. In the ASME E-fest, the SDC team got a National Rank 1. The SDC secured 1st rank Globally.
of 1, the university's IAM3D Team got a National Rank 2. In IAM3D, we got a special mention for Best Design
of 2, and Team D. A. B. B. A. was named among India's Report and secured 7th rank Globally with ranked #1
Top 5 finalists teams. Nationally, and HPVC secured 14th rank Globally
2. Scholarships
Two Mechanical Engineering UG students in the ASME
team received prestigious scholarships:
a. Abhishek Kishor (ME-2024 batch): Garland Duncan
Scholarship ($5,000), ASME Foundation Scholarship
($2,000).
b. Sanjana Ashok Iyer (ME-2024 batch): ASME Founda-
tion Variable Scholarship ($2,000).
Interdisciplinary Aspect
Interdisciplinary research is at the core of the Mechanical Engineering Department.
Our primary aim is to devise environment-friendly and sustainable solutions for
engineering systems to address rising environmental concerns and deterioration of
natural resources. These solutions require an interdisciplinary approach owing to the
complex interlinkages of these issues. One of the groups in the department is
working on a highly interdisciplinary research theme: High-performance energy
storage and conversion devices through severe physical deformation. The research
aims to design and develop electrochemical energy storage devices, including
supercapacitors, batteries, and fuel cells. In addition, the group is also actively
working on developing highly efficient catalysts for green hydrogen production
through electrochemical water splitting. Another group works on environmental
protection via bioinspired approaches and green technologies. Different
technological challenges this group addresses include the development of
self-cleaning solutions through environment-friendly technologies and waste
products, designing and developing a desalination process using clean/green energy
and machine learning to solve fluid-based energy optimisation problems.
Another group of faculties from design specialisation works on aerospace applications, biological
systems, use of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) towards assimilating large data
sets. Indeed, one of the central focus of this group has been towards the non-linear dynamic
analysis of aeroelastic systems, and in turn, augmenting a safe design and operational paradigms
for the same. Interestingly, non-linear dynamics of aeroelastic systems are also well-suited to
describe several biological/physiological applications, such as leaf flutter and dynamics of vocal
folds, and have also been gaining focus over recent times. Similarly, the mechanics of advanced
functionally graded materials (FGMs) have also been a focal topic of research, wherein the
applications range from traditional mechanical systems to augmenting very slender wing
structures for wind turbine blades and micro aerial vehicles (MAVs) and medical applications like
implant/stent design. All of the above, from non-linear dynamical analysis to FGMs, require
enormous data sets and depend on massive computational efforts or demanding experimental
techniques. To address this concern, we've been devoting attention towards using ML or AI
algorithms for both (a) to augment the understanding behind the physics of the problem and
(b) towards prognostics and similar engineering applications.
Curriculum
The Department of Mechanical Engineering at Shiv Nadar University
has a dynamic curriculum and is revised regularly to incorporate
recent industry and research developments. Great emphasis is to the
objective-based learning and hands-on training with a core motive to
develop and improve students' skill sets.
Currently, the department successfully runs the B. Tech. and Ph.D.
programs.
Specialisations
The department offers specialisation in the following areas:
1. Computational Techniques
2. Energy Technology
3. Robotics and Automation
State-of-the-art Laboratories/Research Facilities
The Department of Mechanical • Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM)
Engineering has developed several • Nanomaterials Lab
state-of-the-art laboratories with • Production Lab
sophisticated instruments. Domain • Advance Manufacturing Science Lab
• Manufacturing Process Lab
expert faculty members head each
• Fluid Machinery Lab
laboratory with a supportive and
• Materials Science and Engineering Lab
efficient laboratory technical staff.
• Mechatronics Lab
The department has a high
• Theory of Machine & Vibration Lab
teacher-to-student ratio, enabling
• Surface Science & Tribology Lab
the faculty members to mentor • Bio-Inspired Robotics and Design Lab (BIRD)
each student toward achieving • Advanced Materials and Synthesis Lab
excellence in learning. • Graphics Lab
• IC Engines & Automobiles Lab
• Heat & Mass Transfer/Refrigeration & Air-conditioning Lab
• Energy Systems Lab
• CAD Lab
• Composite MFC Lab
Department of Mechanical Engineering Faculty
DR. HARPREET SINGH DR. HARENDER SINHMAR
Professor and Head, Ph.D., Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, India Associate Professor, Ph.D., Indian Institute of Technology Madras, India
Areas of research: Energy Storage Devices; Catalysis; Supercapacitors; Areas of research: Solar Energy, Power Tower Plants, Solar Still, Water
Surface Engineering; Friction Stir Processing, Bulk Metallic Glasses Desalination, and Alternative Fuels.
(BMGs); High Entropy Alloys (HEAs); Corrosion
DR. SANTANU MITRA DR. RAMESH GUPTA BURELA
Professor, Ph.D., Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, India Associate Professor, Ph.D., Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore India
Areas of research: Biomimetic Robotics, Intelligent Systems and Vehicles, Areas of research: Multifunctional composites, High Altitude Airship (HAA),
Sustainable Energy Engineering and Technologies Dimensional reduction of structures using VAM, Multi-flexible body-dynamics,
Auxetic material modeling, Nonlinear non-classical effects, Nonlinear Finite
Element Analysis, Biomechanics
DR. DIVYA SHRIVASTAVA DR. HARPREET SINGH GREWAL
Associate Professor, Ph.D., Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India Associate Professor, Ph.D., Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, India
Areas of research: Reliability Engineering, Operations Management, Areas of research: Surface modification techniques (thermal spraying,
maintenance management, Statistical Quality control microwave processing, micro/nano-patterning), Tribology
(macro/micro/nano), Wetting, Contact mechanics, Biomimetics
DR. GANESHTHANGARAJ PONNIAH DR. SUMIT TIWARI
Associate Professor, Ph.D., Jeju National University, South Korea Assistant Professor, Ph.D., Indian Institute of Technology Delhi India
Areas of research: Humanoid and biomimetic robotics. Quadruped Areas of research: Solar thermal (Hybrid solar systems namely, PVT air
robot. Industrial Automation and Non-linear control, Fuzzy logic. collector, PVT greenhouse, PVT solar dryer, Green buildings, PVT
biogas system, Agrivoltaics, etc.), Solar cooling, Heat Transfer
DR. SATHI RAJESH REDDY DR. MEHA BOGRA
Assistant Professor, Ph.D., IIT Hyderabad, India Assistant Professor, Ph.D., Applied Physics Theoretical Sciences Unit,
Areas of research: Computational Fluid Dynamics, Multiphase flows, JNCASR, Bangalore India
High fidelity simulations, and GPU computing Areas of research: Mechanical Deformation of Materials, Flexibility of
crystals, Crystal-to-amorphous transitions, Thermal transport at nano-scale,
Thermodynamics of multi-component alloys
DR. ANKIT GUPTA DR. VISAKH VAIKUNTANATHAN
Assistant Professor, Ph.D., Indian Institute of Technology Mandi, India Assistant Professor, Ph.D., Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore India
Areas of research: Computational mechanics, Nonlinear material Areas of research: Multiphase flows, with a specific focus on droplet
models, Composite Structures, deformation theories, Imperfection systems encountered in liquid sprays
sensitivity, Linear and nonlinear finite element analysis.
OUR Program
The university proudly runs its flagship research program • Computation and experimental analysis of
for undergraduate students, known as "Opportunities Microwave Cured Composite Materials
for Undergraduate Research" (OUR). This is a year-long
• Computational investigation on the structure
project wherein the faculty mentor students on a
responses of Functionally Graded Nanocomposites
research project. Students in the department are
• Heat and Mass Transfer Analysis of Parabolic Trough
encouraged to utilise this opportunity. Over the years,
Collector Integrated Solar Water Purifier
our students have done phenomenal work as a part of
OUR program and published research articles in highly • Design & analysis of shape-changing structures
reputed journals. Some of the OUR project titles are using 4D printing technology for various applications
given below as a reference: • Development of advanced machine for
• Design and Analysis of Compliant Deployable biodegradable-eatable cutlery
Mechanisms using Composite Tape-Spring Hinges. • Nano-textured electrodes for high performance
• Four-legged Robotic Dog Super capacitors
• Investigating the Interplay between Wetting and
Droplet Friction
• Computational investigation of various influencing
parameters in metal welded joints
Pathway to Progress
The knowledge, skill set, and overall learning experience gained by our students enable
them for an enriching career. Mechanical engineering students can find employment in
both public and private sectors. Some of the key public sector employers for Mechanical
Engineers include Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited (BHEL), Oil and Natural Gas
Corporation (ONGC), Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited (HPCL) and National
Thermal Power Corporation (NTPC), Defence Research and Development Organization
(DRDO), among others. Students can join government jobs and PSUs through the Graduate
Aptitude Test in Engineering (GATE) and UPSC (ESE) exams.
Many of our students have gone to pursue M.S., Ph.D. & post-doctoral research in global
universities such as the University of Texas at Dallas, University of California San Diego,
Deakin University, Missouri University of Science and Technology, State University of New
York, Buffalo, University of Minnesota, University College Dublin, upon graduating from
Shiv Nadar University.
Student Outcomes
Over the years, the department has attracted a talented
cohort of undergraduate and graduate students. Many of our
graduated students have got admission and fellowships for
Masters in reputed universities around the world, such as
University of Texas at Dallas, University of California San
Diego, Deakin University, Missouri University of Science and
Technology, State University of New York, Buffalo, University
of Minnesota, University College Dublin, Ireland etc. Many of
our bachelor students also got job offers from industrial
giants such as Larsen & Toubro (L&T) Construction, Schindler,
Honda, TVS Motor, DCM Shriram Ltd, Ericsson India and
Cognizant GenC Elevate, among others.
Admissions Eligibility
Bachelor of Technology
Program Selection Criteria Class 12th Eligibility
Route 1 - JEE Mains 2024/ 2023
Mechanical Route 2 - SNUSAT Score + APT Aggregate of Physics,
Engineering Route 3 - CUET 2024 Score + Interview Chemistry and Maths
must be >=65%
Route 4 - Valid College Board SAT Score + Interview
Route 5 - Valid ACT Score + Interview
Scan Here For More Details:
Contact Details
MR. BHUPENDER KUMAR VERMA
Senior Executive Assistant, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
at bhupender.verma@snu.edu.in
DR. SATHI RAJESH REDDY
Department of Mechanical Engineering,
at sathi.reddy@snu.edu.in Scan Here For More Details:
DR. HARPREET SINGH
Professor & Head, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
at harpreet.arora@snu.edu.in
Shiv Nadar University
NH-91, Tehsil Dadri, Gautam Buddha Nagar, Uttar Pradesh – 201314, India
Ph:+91-120-7170100, +91-120-2662002